The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tales of Mother Goose, by Charles Perrault

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Tales of Mother Goose
       As First Collected by Charles Perrault in 1696

Author: Charles Perrault

Annotator: M. V. O'Shea

Illustrator: D. J. Munro

Translator: Charles Welsh

Release Date: December 3, 2005 [EBook #17208]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALES OF MOTHER GOOSE ***




Produced by Geetu Melwani, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                         THE
                TALES OF MOTHER GOOSE
                AS FIRST COLLECTED BY
              CHARLES PERRAULT IN 1696
        _A NEW TRANSLATION BY CHARLES WELSH_

               WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
                     M.V. O'SHEA
  PROFESSOR OF EDUCATION AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN

             ILLUSTRATED BY D.J. MUNRO
           AFTER DRAWINGS BY GUSTAVE DORÉ

           D.C. HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERS
              BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO


 [Illustration: "SHE MET WITH GAFFER WOLF." p. 80.]




[Transcriber's note: In the story "Riquet of the Tuft,"
the following symbols are used to represent
special characters:
 [=e] = the letter "e" with superior macron
 [=a] = the letter "a" with superior macron]



             CONTENTS

                                           PAGE

INTRODUCTION BY PROFESSOR M.V. O'SHEA       vii

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS                       ix

CINDERELLA, OR THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER      1

THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD             13

LITTLE THUMB                                29

THE MASTER CAT, OR PUSS IN BOOTS            45

RIQUET OF THE TUFT                          54

BLUE BEARD                                  66

THE FAIRY                                   75

LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD                      80

NOTE                                        85





LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


"She met with Gaffer Wolf"      _Frontispiece_

                                      PAGE

"It went on very easily"               11

"Let me see if I can do it"            15

"Slipped in under his father's seat"   30

"The Marquis of Carabas is drowning!"  48

"I am exact in keeping my word"        63

"If you open it, there's nothing you
may not expect from my anger"          67

"With all my heart, Goody"             75

"He fell upon the good woman"          81





INTRODUCTION


What virtues do these stories possess that have kept them alive for so
long a time? They have to some degree stimulated and nourished qualities
of supreme worth in individual and social life. With the young the
struggle against greed and falsehood and pride and cowardice is a very
real one, and situations in which these homely, fundamental traits are
involved are full of interest and seriousness. Again, to mature people
the reward of well-doing and the punishment of evil conduct portrayed in
these stories are apt to seem too realistic, too much also on the
cut-and-dried pattern; but it is far different with children. They have
a very concrete sense of right and wrong, and they demand a clear,
explicit, tangible outcome for every sort of action. They must have
concrete, living examples, with the appropriate outcome of each, set
before them.

A modest, faithful child will be strengthened in his good qualities;
while one lacking these will have them aroused, to some extent at any
rate, by following Cinderella in her career. Arrogance and selfishness
come to unhappy straits in this fancy world, and they are likely to
fare the same in the real world; so it would be better to part company
with them, and take up with gentleness and kindliness and faithfulness
instead. And every one may be of some help to others if he be only of
the right mind. The brother who thought himself faring badly with only a
cat for a legacy learns betimes that even so small and apparently
helpless a creature may be of much service when he is rightly disposed.
A person might think little Thumb could accomplish nothing of value to
any one, but he again teaches the child that all depends on the
willingness to be of assistance, the good-heartedness, the
fellow-feeling which one has for others.

In making this version anew the translator has endeavored to retain the
characteristics of the style of the early chap-book versions, while
evading the pompous, stilted language and Johnsonian phraseology so
fashionable when they were first translated.


M.V. O'SHEA.

UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN.





The Tales of Mother Goose.




CINDERELLA, OR THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER.


Once upon a time there was a gentleman who married, for his second wife,
the proudest and most haughty woman that ever was seen. She had two
daughters of her own, who were, indeed, exactly like her in all things.
The gentleman had also a young daughter, of rare goodness and sweetness
of temper, which she took from her mother, who was the best creature in
the world.

The wedding was scarcely over, when the stepmother's bad temper began to
show itself. She could not bear the goodness of this young girl, because
it made her own daughters appear the more odious. The stepmother gave
her the meanest work in the house to do; she had to scour the dishes,
tables, etc., and to scrub the floors and clean out the bedrooms. The
poor girl had to sleep in the garret, upon a wretched straw bed, while
her sisters lay in fine rooms with inlaid floors, upon beds of the very
newest fashion, and where they had looking-glasses so large that they
might see themselves at their full length. The poor girl bore all
patiently, and dared not complain to her father, who would have scolded
her if she had done so, for his wife governed him entirely.

When she had done her work, she used to go into the chimney corner, and
sit down among the cinders, hence she was called Cinderwench. The
younger sister of the two, who was not so rude and uncivil as the elder,
called her Cinderella. However, Cinderella, in spite of her mean
apparel, was a hundred times more handsome than her sisters, though they
were always richly dressed.

It happened that the King's son gave a ball, and invited to it all
persons of fashion. Our young misses were also invited, for they cut a
very grand figure among the people of the country-side. They were highly
delighted with the invitation, and wonderfully busy in choosing the
gowns, petticoats, and head-dresses which might best become them. This
made Cinderella's lot still harder, for it was she who ironed her
sisters' linen and plaited their ruffles. They talked all day long of
nothing but how they should be dressed.

"For my part," said the elder, "I will wear my red velvet suit with
French trimmings."

"And I," said the younger, "shall wear my usual skirt; but then, to make
amends for that I will put on my gold-flowered mantle, and my diamond
stomacher, which is far from being the most ordinary one in the world."
They sent for the best hairdressers they could get to make up their hair
in fashionable style, and bought patches for their cheeks. Cinderella
was consulted in all these matters, for she had good taste. She advised
them always for the best, and even offered her services to dress their
hair, which they were very willing she should do.

As she was doing this, they said to her:--

"Cinderella, would you not be glad to go to the ball?"

"Young ladies," she said, "you only jeer at me; it is not for such as I
am to go there."

"You are right," they replied; "people would laugh to see a Cinderwench
at a ball."

Any one but Cinderella would have dressed their hair awry, but she was
good-natured, and arranged it perfectly well. They were almost two days
without eating, so much were they transported with joy. They broke above
a dozen laces in trying to lace themselves tight, that they might have a
fine, slender shape, and they were continually at their looking-glass.

At last the happy day came; they went to Court, and Cinderella followed
them with her eyes as long as she could, and when she had lost sight of
them, she fell a-crying.

Her godmother, who saw her all in tears, asked her what was the matter.

"I wish I could--I wish I could--" but she could not finish for sobbing.

Her godmother, who was a fairy, said to her, "You wish you could go to
the ball; is it not so?"

"Alas, yes," said Cinderella, sighing.

"Well," said her godmother, "be but a good girl, and I will see that you
go." Then she took her into her chamber, and said to her, "Run into the
garden, and bring me a pumpkin."

Cinderella went at once to gather the finest she could get, and brought
it to her godmother, not being able to imagine how this pumpkin could
help her to go to the ball. Her godmother scooped out all the inside of
it, leaving nothing but the rind. Then she struck it with her wand, and
the pumpkin was instantly turned into a fine gilded coach.

She then went to look into the mouse-trap, where she found six mice, all
alive. She ordered Cinderella to lift the trap-door, when, giving each
mouse, as it went out, a little tap with her wand, it was that moment
turned into a fine horse, and the six mice made a fine set of six horses
of a beautiful mouse-colored, dapple gray.

Being at a loss for a coachman, Cinderella said, "I will go and see if
there is not a rat in the rat-trap--we may make a coachman of him."

"You are right," replied her godmother; "go and look."

Cinderella brought the rat-trap to her, and in it there were three huge
rats. The fairy chose the one which had the largest beard, and, having
touched him with her wand, he was turned into a fat coachman with the
finest mustache and whiskers ever seen.

After that, she said to her:--

"Go into the garden, and you will find six lizards behind the
watering-pot; bring them to me."

She had no sooner done so than her godmother turned them into six
footmen, who skipped up immediately behind the coach, with their
liveries all trimmed with gold and silver, and they held on as if they
had done nothing else their whole lives.

The fairy then said to Cinderella, "Well, you see here a carriage fit to
go to the ball in; are you not pleased with it?"

"Oh, yes!" she cried; "but must I go as I am in these rags?"

Her godmother simply touched her with her wand, and, at the same moment,
her clothes were turned into cloth of gold and silver, all decked with
jewels. This done, she gave her a pair of the prettiest glass slippers
in the whole world. Being thus attired, she got into the carriage, her
godmother commanding her, above all things, not to stay till after
midnight, and telling her, at the same time, that if she stayed one
moment longer, the coach would be a pumpkin again, her horses mice, her
coachman a rat, her footmen lizards, and her clothes would become just
as they were before.

She promised her godmother she would not fail to leave the ball before
midnight. She drove away, scarce able to contain herself for joy. The
King's son, who was told that a great princess, whom nobody knew, was
come, ran out to receive her. He gave her his hand as she alighted from
the coach, and led her into the hall where the company were assembled.
There was at once a profound silence; every one left off dancing, and
the violins ceased to play, so attracted was every one by the singular
beauties of the unknown newcomer. Nothing was then heard but a confused
sound of voices saying:--

"Ha! how beautiful she is! Ha! how beautiful she is!"

The King himself, old as he was, could not keep his eyes off her, and he
told the Queen under his breath that it was a long time since he had
seen so beautiful and lovely a creature.

All the ladies were busy studying her clothes and head-dress, so that
they might have theirs made next day after the same pattern, provided
they could meet with such fine materials and able hands to make them.

The King's son conducted her to the seat of honor, and afterwards took
her out to dance with him. She danced so very gracefully that they all
admired her more and more. A fine collation was served, but the young
Prince ate not a morsel, so intently was he occupied with her.

She went and sat down beside her sisters, showing them a thousand
civilities, and giving them among other things part of the oranges and
citrons with which the Prince had regaled her. This very much surprised
them, for they had not been presented to her.

Cinderella heard the clock strike a quarter to twelve. She at once made
her adieus to the company and hastened away as fast as she could.

As soon as she got home, she ran to find her godmother, and, after
having thanked her, she said she much wished she might go to the ball
the next day, because the King's son had asked her to do so. As she was
eagerly telling her godmother all that happened at the ball, her two
sisters knocked at the door; Cinderella opened it. "How long you have
stayed!" said she, yawning, rubbing her eyes, and stretching herself as
if she had been just awakened. She had not, however, had any desire to
sleep since they went from home.

"If you had been at the ball," said one of her sisters, "you would not
have been tired with it. There came thither the finest princess, the
most beautiful ever was seen with mortal eyes. She showed us a thousand
civilities, and gave us oranges and citrons."

Cinderella did not show any pleasure at this. Indeed, she asked them the
name of the princess; but they told her they did not know it, and that
the King's son was very much concerned, and would give all the world to
know who she was. At this Cinderella, smiling, replied:--

"Was she then so very beautiful? How fortunate you have been! Could I
not see her? Ah! dear Miss Charlotte, do lend me your yellow suit of
clothes which you wear every day."

"Ay, to be sure!" cried Miss Charlotte; "lend my clothes to such a dirty
Cinderwench as thou art! I should be out of my mind to do so."

Cinderella, indeed, expected such an answer and was very glad of the
refusal; for she would have been sadly troubled if her sister had lent
her what she jestingly asked for. The next day the two sisters went to
the ball, and so did Cinderella, but dressed more magnificently than
before. The King's son was always by her side, and his pretty speeches
to her never ceased. These by no means annoyed the young lady. Indeed,
she quite forgot her godmother's orders to her, so that she heard the
clock begin to strike twelve when she thought it could not be more than
eleven. She then rose up and fled, as nimble as a deer. The Prince
followed, but could not overtake her. She left behind one of her glass
slippers, which the Prince took up most carefully. She got home, but
quite out of breath, without her carriage, and in her old clothes,
having nothing left her of all her finery but one of the little
slippers, fellow to the one she had dropped. The guards at the palace
gate were asked if they had not seen a princess go out, and they replied
they had seen nobody go out but a young girl, very meanly dressed, and
who had more the air of a poor country girl than of a young lady.

When the two sisters returned from the ball, Cinderella asked them if
they had had a pleasant time, and if the fine lady had been there. They
told her, yes; but that she hurried away the moment it struck twelve,
and with so much haste that she dropped one of her little glass
slippers, the prettiest in the world, which the King's son had taken up.
They said, further, that he had done nothing but look at her all the
time, and that most certainly he was very much in love with the
beautiful owner of the glass slipper.

What they said was true; for a few days after the King's son caused it
to be proclaimed, by sound of trumpet, that he would marry her whose
foot this slipper would fit exactly. They began to try it on the
princesses, then on the duchesses, and then on all the ladies of the
Court; but in vain. It was brought to the two sisters, who did all they
possibly could to thrust a foot into the slipper, but they could not
succeed. Cinderella, who saw this, and knew her slipper, said to them,
laughing:--

"Let me see if it will not fit me."

Her sisters burst out a-laughing, and began to banter her. The gentleman
who was sent to try the slipper looked earnestly at Cinderella, and,
finding her very handsome, said it was but just that she should try, and
that he had orders to let every lady try it on.

He obliged Cinderella to sit down, and, putting the slipper to her
little foot, he found it went on very easily, and fitted her as if it
had been made of wax. The astonishment of her two sisters was great, but
it was still greater when Cinderella pulled out of her pocket the other
slipper and put it on her foot. Thereupon, in came her godmother, who,
having touched Cinderella's clothes with her wand, made them more
magnificent than those she had worn before.

[Illustration: "IT WENT ON VERY EASILY." p. 10.]

And now her two sisters found her to be that beautiful lady they had
seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet to beg pardon for
all their ill treatment of her. Cinderella took them up, and, as she
embraced them, said that she forgave them with all her heart, and begged
them to love her always.

She was conducted to the young Prince, dressed as she was. He thought
her more charming than ever, and, a few days after, married her.
Cinderella, who was as good as she was beautiful, gave her two sisters a
home in the palace, and that very same day married them to two great
lords of the Court.




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOODS.


Once upon a time there was a king and a queen, who were very sorry that
they had no children,--so sorry that it cannot be told.

At last, however, the Queen had a daughter. There was a very fine
christening; and the Princess had for her godmothers all the fairies
they could find in the whole kingdom (there were seven of them), so that
every one of them might confer a gift upon her, as was the custom of
fairies in those days. By this means the Princess had all the
perfections imaginable.

After the christening was over, the company returned to the King's
palace, where was prepared a great feast for the fairies. There was
placed before every one of them a magnificent cover with a case of
massive gold, wherein were a spoon, and a knife and fork, all of pure
gold set with diamonds and rubies. But as they were all sitting down at
table they saw a very old fairy come into the hall. She had not been
invited, because for more than fifty years she had not been out of a
certain tower, and she was believed to be either dead or enchanted.

The King ordered her a cover, but he could not give her a case of gold
as the others had, because seven only had been made for the seven
fairies. The old fairy fancied she was slighted, and muttered threats
between her teeth. One of the young fairies who sat near heard her, and,
judging that she might give the little Princess some unlucky gift, hid
herself behind the curtains as soon as they left the table. She hoped
that she might speak last and undo as much as she could the evil which
the old fairy might do.

In the meanwhile all the fairies began to give their gifts to the
Princess. The youngest gave her for her gift that she should be the most
beautiful person in the world; the next, that she should have the wit of
an angel; the third, that she should be able to do everything she did
gracefully; the fourth, that she should dance perfectly; the fifth, that
she should sing like a nightingale; and the sixth, that she should play
all kinds of musical instruments to the fullest perfection.

The old fairy's turn coming next, her head shaking more with spite than
with age, she said that the Princess should pierce her hand with a
spindle and die of the wound. This terrible gift made the whole company
tremble, and everybody fell a-crying.

At this very instant the young fairy came from behind the curtains and
said these words in a loud voice:--

"Assure yourselves, O King and Queen, that your daughter shall not die
of this disaster. It is true, I have no power to undo entirely what my
elder has done. The Princess shall indeed pierce her hand with a
spindle; but, instead of dying, she shall only fall into a deep sleep,
which shall last a hundred years, at the end of which a king's son shall
come and awake her."

The King, to avoid the misfortune foretold by the old fairy, issued
orders forbidding any one, on pain of death, to spin with a distaff and
spindle, or to have a spindle in his house. About fifteen or sixteen
years after, the King and Queen being absent at one of their country
villas, the young Princess was one day running up and down the palace;
she went from room to room, and at last she came into a little garret on
the top of the tower, where a good old woman, alone, was spinning with
her spindle. This good woman had never heard of the King's orders
against spindles.

"What are you doing there, my good woman?" said the Princess.

"I am spinning, my pretty child," said the old woman, who did not know
who the Princess was.

"Ha!" said the Princess, "this is very pretty; how do you do it? Give it
to me. Let me see if I can do it."

She had no sooner taken it into her hand than, either because she was
too quick and heedless, or because the decree of the fairy had so
ordained, it ran into her hand, and she fell down in a swoon.

The good old woman, not knowing what to do, cried out for help. People
came in from every quarter; they threw water upon the face of the
Princess, unlaced her, struck her on the palms of her hands, and rubbed
her temples with cologne water; but nothing would bring her to herself.

Then the King, who came up at hearing the noise, remembered what the
fairies had foretold. He knew very well that this must come to pass,
since the fairies had foretold it, and he caused the Princess to be
carried into the finest room in his palace, and to be laid upon a bed
all embroidered with gold and silver. One would have taken her for a
little angel, she was so beautiful; for her swooning had not dimmed the
brightness of her complexion: her cheeks were carnation, and her lips
coral. It is true her eyes were shut, but she was heard to breathe
softly, which satisfied those about her that she was not dead.

[Illustration: "LET ME SEE IF I CAN DO IT." p. 15.]

The King gave orders that they should let her sleep quietly till the
time came for her to awake. The good fairy who had saved her life by
condemning her to sleep a hundred years was in the kingdom of Matakin,
twelve thousand leagues off, when this accident befell the Princess;
but she was instantly informed of it by a little dwarf, who had
seven-leagued boots, that is, boots with which he could stride over
seven leagues of ground at once. The fairy started off at once, and
arrived, about an hour later, in a fiery chariot drawn by dragons.

The King handed her out of the chariot, and she approved everything he
had done; but as she had very great foresight, she thought that when the
Princess should awake she might not know what to do with herself, if she
was all alone in this old palace. This was what she did: she touched
with her wand everything in the palace (except the King and
Queen),--governesses, maids of honor, ladies of the bedchamber,
gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, undercooks, kitchen maids, guards
with their porters, pages, and footmen; she likewise touched all the
horses which were in the stables, the cart horses, the hunters and the
saddle horses, the grooms, the great dogs in the outward court, and
little Mopsey, too, the Princess's spaniel, which was lying on the bed.

As soon as she touched them they all fell asleep, not to awake again
until their mistress did, that they might be ready to wait upon her when
she wanted them. The very spits at the fire, as full as they could hold
of partridges and pheasants, fell asleep, and the fire itself as well.
All this was done in a moment. Fairies are not long in doing their
work.

And now the King and Queen, having kissed their dear child without
waking her, went out of the palace and sent forth orders that nobody
should come near it.

These orders were not necessary; for in a quarter of an hour's time
there grew up all round about the park such a vast number of trees,
great and small, bushes and brambles, twining one within another, that
neither man nor beast could pass through; so that nothing could be seen
but the very top of the towers of the palace; and that, too, only from
afar off. Every one knew that this also was the work of the fairy in
order that while the Princess slept she should have nothing to fear from
curious people.

After a hundred years the son of the King then reigning, who was of
another family from that of the sleeping Princess, was a-hunting on that
side of the country, and he asked what those towers were which he saw in
the middle of a great thick wood. Every one answered according as they
had heard. Some said that it was an old haunted castle, others that all
the witches of the country held their midnight revels there, but the
common opinion was that it was an ogre's dwelling, and that he carried
to it all the little children he could catch, so as to eat them up at
his leisure, without any one being able to follow him, for he alone had
the power to make his way through the wood.

The Prince did not know what to believe, and presently a very aged
countryman spake to him thus:--

"May it please your royal Highness, more than fifty years since I heard
from my father that there was then in this castle the most beautiful
princess that was ever seen; that she must sleep there a hundred years,
and that she should be waked by a king's son, for whom she was
reserved."

The young Prince on hearing this was all on fire. He thought, without
weighing the matter, that he could put an end to this rare adventure;
and, pushed on by love and the desire of glory, resolved at once to look
into it.

As soon as he began to get near to the wood, all the great trees, the
bushes, and brambles gave way of themselves to let him pass through. He
walked up to the castle which he saw at the end of a large avenue; and
you can imagine he was a good deal surprised when he saw none of his
people following him, because the trees closed again as soon as he had
passed through them. However, he did not cease from continuing his way;
a young prince in search of glory is ever valiant.

He came into a spacious outer court, and what he saw was enough to
freeze him with horror. A frightful silence reigned over all; the image
of death was everywhere, and there was nothing to be seen but what
seemed to be the outstretched bodies of dead men and animals. He,
however, very well knew, by the ruby faces and pimpled noses of the
porters, that they were only asleep; and their goblets, wherein still
remained some drops of wine, showed plainly that they had fallen asleep
while drinking their wine.

He then crossed a court paved with marble, went up the stairs, and came
into the guard chamber, where guards were standing in their ranks, with
their muskets upon their shoulders, and snoring with all their might. He
went through several rooms full of gentlemen and ladies, some standing
and others sitting, but all were asleep. He came into a gilded chamber,
where he saw upon a bed, the curtains of which were all open, the most
beautiful sight ever beheld--a princess who appeared to be about fifteen
or sixteen years of age, and whose bright and resplendent beauty had
something divine in it. He approached with trembling and admiration, and
fell down upon his knees before her.

Then, as the end of the enchantment was come, the Princess awoke, and
looking on him with eyes more tender than could have been expected at
first sight, said:--

"Is it you, my Prince? You have waited a long while."

The Prince, charmed with these words, and much more with the manner in
which they were spoken, knew not how to show his joy and gratitude; he
assured her that he loved her better than he did himself. Their
discourse was not very connected, but they were the better pleased, for
where there is much love there is little eloquence. He was more at a
loss than she, and we need not wonder at it; she had had time to think
of what to say to him; for it is evident (though history says nothing of
it) that the good fairy, during so long a sleep, had given her very
pleasant dreams. In short, they talked together for four hours, and then
they said not half they had to say.

In the meanwhile all the palace had woke up with the Princess; every one
thought upon his own business, and as they were not in love, they were
ready to die of hunger. The lady of honor, being as sharp set as the
other folks, grew very impatient, and told the Princess aloud that the
meal was served. The Prince helped the Princess to rise. She was
entirely and very magnificently dressed; but his royal Highness took
care not to tell her that she was dressed like his great-grandmother,
and had a high collar. She looked not a bit the less charming and
beautiful for all that.

They went into the great mirrored hall, where they supped, and were
served by the officers of the Princess's household. The violins and
hautboys played old tunes, but they were excellent, though they had not
been played for a hundred years; and after supper, without losing any
time, the lord almoner married them in the chapel of the castle. They
had but very little sleep--the Princess scarcely needed any; and the
Prince left her next morning to return into the city, where his father
was greatly troubled about him.

The Prince told him that he lost his way in the forest as he was
hunting, and that he had slept in the cottage of a charcoal-burner, who
gave him cheese and brown bread.

The King, his father, who was a good man, believed him; but his mother
could not be persuaded that it was true; and seeing that he went almost
every day a-hunting, and that he always had some excuse ready for so
doing, though he had been out three or four nights together, she began
to suspect that he was married; for he lived thus with the Princess
above two whole years, during which they had two children, the elder, a
daughter, was named Dawn, and the younger, a son, they called Day,
because he was a great deal handsomer than his sister.

The Queen spoke several times to her son, to learn after what manner he
was passing his time, and told him that in this he ought in duty to
satisfy her. But he never dared to trust her with his secret; he feared
her, though he loved her, for she was of the race of the Ogres, and the
King married her for her vast riches alone. It was even whispered about
the Court that she had Ogreish inclinations, and that, whenever she saw
little children passing by, she had all the difficulty in the world to
prevent herself from falling upon them. And so the Prince would never
tell her one word.

But when the King was dead, which happened about two years afterward,
and he saw himself lord and master, he openly declared his marriage: and
he went in great state to conduct his Queen to the palace. They made a
magnificent entry into the capital city, she riding between her two
children.

Soon after, the King made war on Emperor Cantalabutte, his neighbor. He
left the government of the kingdom to the Queen, his mother, and
earnestly commended his wife and children to her care. He was obliged to
carry on the war all the summer, and as soon as he left, the
Queen-mother sent her daughter-in-law and her children to a country
house among the woods, that she might with the more ease gratify her
horrible longing. Some few days afterward she went thither herself, and
said to her head cook:--

"I intend to eat little Dawn for my dinner to-morrow."

"O! madam!" cried the head cook.

"I will have it so," replied the Queen (and this she spoke in the tone
of an Ogress who had a strong desire to eat fresh meat), "and will eat
her with a sharp sauce."

The poor man, knowing very well that he must not play tricks with
Ogresses, took his great knife and went up into little Dawn's chamber.
She was then nearly four years old, and came up to him, jumping and
laughing, to put her arms round his neck, and ask him for some
sugar-candy. Upon which he began to weep, the great knife fell out of
his hand, and he went into the back yard and killed a little lamb, and
dressed it with such good sauce that his mistress assured him she had
never eaten anything so good in her life. He had at the same time taken
up little Dawn and carried her to his wife, to conceal her in his
lodging at the end of the courtyard.

Eight days afterwards the wicked Queen said to the chief cook, "I will
sup upon little Day."

He answered not a word, being resolved to cheat her again as he had done
before. He went to find little Day, and saw him with a foil in his hand,
with which he was fencing with a great monkey: the child was then only
three years of age. He took him up in his arms and carried him to his
wife, that she might conceal him in her chamber along with his sister,
and instead of little Day he served up a young and very tender kid,
which the Ogress found to be wonderfully good.

All had gone well up to now; but one evening this wicked Queen said to
her chief cook:--

"I will eat the Queen with the same sauce I had with her children."

Now the poor chief cook was in despair and could not imagine how to
deceive her again. The young Queen was over twenty years old, not
reckoning the hundred years she had been asleep: and how to find
something to take her place greatly puzzled him. He then decided, to
save his own life, to cut the Queen's throat; and going up into her
chamber, with intent to do it at once, he put himself into as great fury
as he possibly could, and came into the young Queen's room with his
dagger in his hand. He would not, however, deceive her, but told her,
with a great deal of respect, the orders he had received from the
Queen-mother.

"Do it; do it," she said, stretching out her neck. "Carry out your
orders, and then I shall go and see my children, my poor children, whom
I loved so much and so tenderly."

For she thought them dead, since they had been taken away without her
knowledge.

"No, no, madam," cried the poor chief cook, all in tears; "you shall not
die, and you shall see your children again at once. But then you must
go home with me to my lodgings, where I have concealed them, and I will
deceive the Queen once more, by giving her a young hind in your stead."

Upon this he forthwith conducted her to his room, where, leaving her to
embrace her children, and cry along with them, he went and dressed a
young hind, which the Queen had for her supper, and devoured with as
much appetite as if it had been the young Queen. She was now well
satisfied with her cruel deeds, and she invented a story to tell the
King on his return, of how the Queen his wife and her two children had
been devoured by mad wolves.

One evening, as she was, according to her custom, rambling round about
the courts and yards of the palace to see if she could smell any fresh
meat, she heard, in a room on the ground floor, little Day crying, for
his mamma was going to whip him, because he had been naughty; and she
heard, at the same time, little Dawn begging mercy for her brother.

The Ogress knew the voice of the Queen and her children at once, and
being furious at having been thus deceived, she gave orders (in a most
horrible voice which made everybody tremble) that, next morning by break
of day, they should bring into the middle of the great court a large tub
filled with toads, vipers, snakes, and all sorts of serpents, in order
to have the Queen and her children, the chief cook, his wife and maid,
thrown into it, all of whom were to be brought thither with their hands
tied behind them.

They were brought out accordingly, and the executioners were just going
to throw them into the tub, when the King, who was not so soon expected,
entered the court on horseback and asked, with the utmost astonishment,
what was the meaning of that horrible spectacle.

No one dared to tell him, when the Ogress, all enraged to see what had
happened, threw herself head foremost into the tub, and was instantly
devoured by the ugly creatures she had ordered to be thrown into it to
kill the others. The King was of course very sorry, for she was his
mother; but he soon comforted himself with his beautiful wife and his
pretty children.




LITTLE THUMB.


Once upon a time there was a fagot-maker and his wife, who had seven
children, all boys. The eldest was but ten years old, and the youngest
only seven.

They were very poor, and their seven children were a great source of
trouble to them because not one of them was able to earn his bread. What
gave them yet more uneasiness was that the youngest was very delicate,
and scarce ever spoke a word, which made people take for stupidity that
which was a sign of good sense. He was very little, and when born he was
no bigger than one's thumb; hence he was called Little Thumb.

The poor child was the drudge of the household, and was always in the
wrong. He was, however, the most bright and discreet of all the
brothers; and if he spoke little, he heard and thought the more.

There came a very bad year, and the famine was so great that these poor
people resolved to rid themselves of their children. One evening, when
they were in bed, and the fagot-maker was sitting with his wife at the
fire, he said to her, with his heart ready to burst with grief:--

"You see plainly that we no longer can give our children food, and I
cannot bear to see them die of hunger before my eyes; I am resolved to
lose them in the wood to-morrow, which may very easily be done, for,
while they amuse themselves in tying up fagots, we have only to run away
and leave them without their seeing us."

"Ah!" cried out his wife, "could you really take the children and lose
them?"

In vain did her husband represent to her their great poverty; she would
not consent to it. She was poor, but she was their mother.

However, having considered what a grief it would be to her to see them
die of hunger, she consented, and went weeping to bed.

Little Thumb heard all they had said; for, hearing that they were
talking business, he got up softly and slipped under his father's seat,
so as to hear without being seen. He went to bed again, but did not
sleep a wink all the rest of the night, thinking of what he had to do.
He got up early in the morning, and went to the brookside, where he
filled his pockets full of small white pebbles, and then returned home.
They all went out, but Little Thumb never told his brothers a word of
what he knew.

[Illustration: "SLIPPED UNDER HIS FATHER'S SEAT." p. 30.]

They went into a very thick forest, where they could not see one
another at ten paces apart. The fagot-maker began to cut wood, and the
children to gather up sticks to make fagots. Their father and mother,
seeing them busy at their work, got away from them unbeknown and then
all at once ran as fast as they could through a winding by-path.

When the children found they were alone, they began to cry with all
their might. Little Thumb let them cry on, knowing very well how to get
home again; for, as he came, he had dropped the little white pebbles he
had in his pockets all along the way. Then he said to them, "Do not be
afraid, my brothers,--father and mother have left us here, but I will
lead you home again; only follow me."

They followed, and he brought them home by the very same way they had
come into the forest. They dared not go in at first, but stood outside
the door to listen to what their father and mother were saying.

The very moment the fagot-maker and his wife reached home the lord of
the manor sent them ten crowns, which he had long owed them, and which
they never hoped to see. This gave them new life, for the poor people
were dying of hunger. The fagot-maker sent his wife to the butcher's at
once. As it was a long while since they had eaten, she bought thrice as
much meat as was needed for supper for two people. When they had eaten,
the woman said:--

"Alas! where are our poor children now? They would make a good feast of
what we have left here; it was you, William, who wished to lose them. I
told you we should repent of it. What are they now doing in the forest?
Alas! perhaps the wolves have already eaten them up; you are very
inhuman thus to have lost your children."

The fagot-maker grew at last quite out of patience, for she repeated
twenty times that he would repent of it, and that she was in the right.
He threatened to beat her if she did not hold her tongue. The
fagot-maker was, perhaps, more sorry than his wife, but she teased him
so he could not endure it. She wept bitterly, saying:--

"Alas! where are my children now, my poor children?"

She said this once so very loud that the children, who were at the door,
heard her and cried out all together:--

"Here we are! Here we are!"

She ran immediately to let them in, and said as she embraced them:--

"How happy I am to see you again, my dear children; you are very tired
and very hungry, and, my poor Peter, you are covered with mud. Come in
and let me clean you."

Peter was her eldest son, whom she loved more than all the rest, because
he was red haired, as she was herself.

They sat down to table, and ate with an appetite which pleased both
father and mother, to whom they told how frightened they were in the
forest, nearly all speaking at once. The good folk were delighted to see
their children once more, and this joy continued while the ten crowns
lasted. But when the money was all spent, they fell again into their
former uneasiness, and resolved to lose their children again. And, that
they might be the surer of doing it, they determined to take them much
farther than before.

They could not talk of this so secretly but they were overheard by
Little Thumb, who laid his plans to get out of the difficulty as he had
done before; but, though he got up very early to go and pick up some
little pebbles, he could not, for he found the house-door double-locked.
He did not know what to do. Their father had given each of them a piece
of bread for their breakfast. He reflected that he might make use of the
bread instead of the pebbles, by throwing crumbs all along the way they
should pass, and so he stuffed it in his pocket. Their father and mother
led them into the thickest and most obscure part of the forest, and
then, stealing away into a by-path, left them there. Little Thumb was
not very much worried about it, for he thought he could easily find the
way again by means of his bread, which he had scattered all along as he
came; but he was very much surprised when he could not find a single
crumb: the birds had come and eaten them all.

They were now in great trouble; for the more they wandered, the deeper
they went into the forest. Night now fell, and there arose a high wind,
which filled them with fear. They fancied they heard on every side the
howling of wolves coming to devour them. They scarce dared to speak or
turn their heads. Then it rained very hard, which wetted them to the
skin. Their feet slipped at every step, and they fell into the mud,
covering their hands with it so that they knew not what to do with them.

Little Thumb climbed up to the top of a tree, to see if he could
discover anything. Looking on every side, he saw at last a glimmering
light, like that of a candle, but a long way beyond the forest. He came
down, and, when upon the ground, he could see it no more, which
grieved him sadly. However, having walked for some time with his
brothers toward that side on which he had seen the light, he discovered
it again as he came out of the wood.

They arrived at last at the house where this candle was, not without
many frights; for very often they lost sight of it, which happened
every time they came into a hollow. They knocked at the door, and a good
woman came and opened it.

She asked them what they wanted. Little Thumb told her they were poor
children who were lost in the forest, and desired to lodge there for
charity's sake. The woman, seeing them all so very pretty, began to weep
and said to them: "Alas! poor babies, where do you come from? Do you
know that this house belongs to a cruel Ogre who eats little children?"

"Alas! dear madam," answered Little Thumb (who, with his brothers, was
trembling in every limb), "what shall we do? The wolves of the forest
surely will devour us to-night if you refuse us shelter in your house;
and so we would rather the gentleman should eat us. Perhaps he may take
pity upon us if you will be pleased to ask him to do so."

The Ogre's wife, who believed she could hide them from her husband till
morning, let them come in, and took them to warm themselves at a very
good fire; for there was a whole sheep roasting for the Ogre's supper.

As they began to warm themselves they heard three or four great raps at
the door; this was the Ogre, who was come home. His wife quickly hid
them under the bed and went to open the door. The Ogre at once asked if
supper was ready and the wine drawn, and then sat himself down to
table. The sheep was as yet all raw, but he liked it the better for
that. He sniffed about to the right and left, saying:--

"I smell fresh meat."

"What you smell," said his wife, "must be the calf which I have just now
killed and flayed."

"I smell fresh meat, I tell you once more," replied the Ogre, looking
crossly at his wife, "and there is something here which I do not
understand."

As he spoke these words he got up from the table and went straight to
the bed.

"Ah!" said he, "that is how you would cheat me; I know not why I do not
eat you, too; it is well for you that you are tough. Here is game, which
comes very luckily to entertain three Ogres of my acquaintance who are
to pay me a visit in a day or two."

He dragged them out from under the bed, one by one. The poor children
fell upon their knees and begged his pardon, but they had to do with one
of the most cruel of Ogres, who, far from having any pity on them, was
already devouring them in his mind, and told his wife they would be
delicate eating when she had made a good sauce.

He then took a great knife, and, coming up to these poor children,
sharpened it upon a great whetstone which he held in his left hand. He
had already taken hold of one of them when his wife said to him:--

"What need you do it now? Will you not have time enough to-morrow?"

"Hold your prating," said the Ogre; "they will eat the tenderer."

"But you have so much meat already," replied his wife; "here are a calf,
two sheep, and half a pig."

"That is true," said the Ogre; "give them a good supper that they may
not grow thin, and put them to bed."

The good woman was overjoyed at this, and gave them a good supper; but
they were so much afraid that they could not eat. As for the Ogre, he
sat down again to drink, being highly pleased that he had the
wherewithal to treat his friends. He drank a dozen glasses more than
ordinary, which got up into his head and obliged him to go to bed.

The Ogre had seven daughters, who were still little children. These
young Ogresses had all of them very fine complexions; but they all had
little gray eyes, quite round, hooked noses, a very large mouth, and
very long, sharp teeth, set far apart. They were not as yet wicked, but
they promised well to be, for they had already bitten little children.

They had been put to bed early, all seven in one bed, with every one a
crown of gold upon her head. There was in the same chamber a bed of the
like size, and the Ogre's wife put the seven little boys into this bed,
after which she went to bed herself.

Little Thumb, who had observed that the Ogre's daughters had crowns of
gold upon their heads, and was afraid lest the Ogre should repent his
not killing them that evening, got up about midnight, and, taking his
brothers' bonnets and his own, went very softly and put them upon the
heads of the seven little Ogresses, after having taken off their crowns
of gold, which he put upon his own head and his brothers', so that the
Ogre might take them for his daughters, and his daughters for the little
boys whom he wanted to kill.

Things turned out just as he had thought; for the Ogre, waking about
midnight, regretted that he had deferred till morning to do that which
he might have done overnight, and jumped quickly out of bed, taking his
great knife.

"Let us see," said he, "how our little rogues do, and not make two jobs
of the matter."

He then went up, groping all the way, into his daughters' chamber; and,
coming to the bed where the little boys lay, and who were all fast
asleep, except Little Thumb, who was terribly afraid when he found the
Ogre fumbling about his head, as he had done about his brothers', he
felt the golden crowns, and said:--

"I should have made a fine piece of work of it, truly; it is clear I
drank too much last night."

Then he went to the bed where the girls lay, and, having found the boys'
little bonnets:--

"Ah!" said he, "my merry lads, are you there? Let us work boldly."

And saying these words, without more ado, he cruelly murdered all his
seven daughters. Well pleased with what he had done, he went to bed
again.

So soon as Little Thumb heard the Ogre snore, he waked his brothers, and
bade them put on their clothes quickly and follow him. They stole softly
into the garden and got over the wall. They ran about, all night,
trembling all the while, without knowing which way they went.

The Ogre, when he woke, said to his wife: "Go upstairs and dress those
young rascals who came here last night." The Ogress was very much
surprised at this goodness of her husband, not dreaming after what
manner she should dress them; but, thinking that he had ordered her to
go up and put on their clothes, she went, and was horrified when she
perceived her seven daughters all dead.

She began by fainting away, as was only natural in such a case. The
Ogre, fearing his wife was too long in doing what he had ordered, went
up himself to help her. He was no less amazed than his wife at this
frightful spectacle.

"Ah! what have I done?" cried he. "The wretches shall pay for it, and
that instantly."

He threw a pitcher of water upon his wife's face, and having brought her
to herself, "Give me quickly," cried he, "my seven-leagued boots, that I
may go and catch them."

He went out into the country, and, after running in all directions, he
came at last into the very road where the poor children were, and not
above a hundred paces from their father's house. They espied the Ogre,
who went at one step from mountain to mountain, and over rivers as
easily as the narrowest brooks. Little Thumb, seeing a hollow rock near
the place where they were, hid his brothers in it, and crowded into it
himself, watching always what would become of the Ogre.

The Ogre, who found himself tired with his long and fruitless journey
(for these boots of seven leagues greatly taxed the wearer), had a great
mind to rest himself, and, by chance, went to sit down upon the rock in
which the little boys had hidden themselves. As he was worn out with
fatigue, he fell asleep, and, after reposing himself some time, began to
snore so frightfully that the poor children were no less afraid of him
than when he held up his great knife and was going to take their lives.
Little Thumb was not so much frightened as his brothers, and told them
that they should run away at once toward home while the Ogre was asleep
so soundly, and that they need not be in any trouble about him. They
took his advice, and got home quickly.

Little Thumb then went close to the Ogre, pulled off his boots gently,
and put them on his own legs. The boots were very long and large, but as
they were fairy boots, they had the gift of becoming big or little,
according to the legs of those who wore them; so that they fitted his
feet and legs as well as if they had been made for him. He went straight
to the Ogre's house, where he saw his wife crying bitterly for the loss
of her murdered daughters.

"Your husband," said Little Thumb, "is in very great danger, for he has
been taken by a gang of thieves, who have sworn to kill him if he does
not give them all his gold and silver. At the very moment they held
their daggers at his throat he perceived me and begged me to come and
tell you the condition he was in, and to say that you should give me all
he has of value, without retaining any one thing; for otherwise they
will kill him without mercy. As his case is very pressing, he desired me
to make use of his seven-leagued boots, which you see I have on, so that
I might make the more haste and that I might show you that I do not
impose upon you."

The good woman, being greatly frightened, gave him all she had; for this
Ogre was a very good husband, though he ate up little children. Little
Thumb, having thus got all the Ogre's money, came home to his father's
house, where he was received with abundance of joy.

There are many people who do not agree in regard to this act of Little
Thumb's, and pretend that he never robbed the Ogre at all, and that he
only thought he might very justly take off his seven-leagued boots
because he made no other use of them but to run after little children.
These folks affirm that they are very well assured of this, because they
have drunk and eaten often at the fagot-maker's house. They declare that
when Little Thumb had taken off the Ogre's boots he went to Court, where
he was informed that they were very much in trouble about a certain
army, which was two hundred leagues off, and anxious as to the success
of a battle. He went, they say, to the King and told him that if he
desired it, he would bring him news from the army before night.

The King promised him a great sum of money if he succeeded. Little Thumb
returned that very same night with the news; and, this first expedition
causing him to be known, he earned as much as he wished, for the King
paid him very well for carrying his orders to the army. Many ladies
employed him also to carry messages, from which he made much money.
After having for some time carried on the business of a messenger and
gained thereby great wealth, he went home to his father, and it is
impossible to express the joy of his family. He placed them all in
comfortable circumstances, bought places for his father and brothers,
and by that means settled them very handsomely in the world, while he
successfully continued to make his own way.




THE MASTER CAT, OR PUSS IN BOOTS.


Once upon a time there was a miller who left no more riches to the three
sons he had than his mill, his ass, and his cat. The division was soon
made. Neither the lawyer nor the attorney was sent for. They would soon
have eaten up all the poor property. The eldest had the mill, the second
the ass, and the youngest nothing but the cat.

The youngest, as we can understand, was quite unhappy at having so poor
a share.

"My brothers," said he, "may get their living handsomely enough by
joining their stocks together; but, for my part, when I have eaten up my
cat, and made me a muff of his skin, I must die of hunger."

The Cat, who heard all this, without appearing to take any notice, said
to him with a grave and serious air:--

"Do not thus afflict yourself, my master; you have nothing else to do
but to give me a bag, and get a pair of boots made for me, that I may
scamper through the brambles, and you shall see that you have not so
poor a portion in me as you think."

Though the Cat's master did not think much of what he said, he had seen
him play such cunning tricks to catch rats and mice--hanging himself by
the heels, or hiding himself in the meal, to make believe he was
dead--that he did not altogether despair of his helping him in his
misery. When the Cat had what he asked for, he booted himself very
gallantly, and putting his bag about his neck, he held the strings of it
in his two forepaws, and went into a warren where was a great number of
rabbits. He put bran and sow-thistle into his bag, and, stretching out
at length, as if he were dead, he waited for some young rabbits, not yet
acquainted with the deceits of the world, to come and rummage his bag
for what he had put into it.

Scarcely was he settled but he had what he wanted. A rash and foolish
young rabbit jumped into his bag, and Monsieur Puss, immediately drawing
close the strings, took him and killed him at once. Proud of his prey,
he went with it to the palace, and asked to speak with the King. He was
shown upstairs into his Majesty's apartment, and, making a low bow to
the King, he said:--

"I have brought you, sire, a rabbit which my noble Lord, the Master of
Carabas" (for that was the title which Puss was pleased to give his
master) "has commanded me to present to your Majesty from him."

"Tell thy master," said the King, "that I thank him, and that I am
pleased with his gift."

Another time he went and hid himself among some standing corn, still
holding his bag open; and when a brace of partridges ran into it, he
drew the strings, and so caught them both. He then went and made a
present of these to the King, as he had done before of the rabbit which
he took in the warren. The King, in like manner, received the partridges
with great pleasure, and ordered his servants to reward him.

The Cat continued for two or three months thus to carry his Majesty,
from time to time, some of his master's game. One day when he knew that
the King was to take the air along the riverside, with his daughter, the
most beautiful princess in the world, he said to his master:--

"If you will follow my advice, your fortune is made. You have nothing
else to do but go and bathe in the river, just at the spot I shall show
you, and leave the rest to me."

The Marquis of Carabas did what the Cat advised him to, without knowing
what could be the use of doing it. While he was bathing, the King passed
by, and the Cat cried out with all his might:--

"Help! help! My Lord the Marquis of Carabas is drowning!"

At this noise the King put his head out of the coach window, and seeing
the Cat who had so often brought him game, he commanded his guards to
run immediately to the assistance of his Lordship the Marquis of
Carabas.

While they were drawing the poor Marquis out of the river, the Cat came
up to the coach and told the King that, while his master was bathing,
there came by some rogues, who ran off with his clothes, though he had
cried out, "Thieves! thieves!" several times, as loud as he could. The
cunning Cat had hidden the clothes under a great stone. The King
immediately commanded the officers of his wardrobe to run and fetch one
of his best suits for the Lord Marquis of Carabas.

[Illustration: "THE MARQUIS OF CARABAS IS DROWNING!" p. 48.]

The King was extremely polite to him, and as the fine clothes he had
given him set off his good looks (for he was well made and handsome),
the King's daughter found him very much to her liking, and the Marquis
of Carabas had no sooner cast two or three respectful and somewhat
tender glances than she fell in love with him to distraction. The King
would have him come into the coach and take part in the airing. The Cat,
overjoyed to see his plan begin to succeed, marched on before, and,
meeting with some countrymen, who were mowing a meadow, he said to
them:--

"Good people, you who are mowing, if you do not tell the King that the
meadow you mow belongs to my Lord Marquis of Carabas, you shall be
chopped as small as herbs for the pot."

The King did not fail to ask the mowers to whom the meadow they were
mowing belonged.

"To my Lord Marquis of Carabas," answered they all together, for the
Cat's threat had made them afraid.

"You have a good property there," said the King to the Marquis of
Carabas.

"You see, sire," said the Marquis, "this is a meadow which never fails
to yield a plentiful harvest every year."

The Master Cat, who went still on before, met with some reapers, and
said to them:--

"Good people, you who are reaping, if you do not say that all this corn
belongs to the Marquis of Carabas, you shall be chopped as small as
herbs for the pot."

The King, who passed by a moment after, wished to know to whom belonged
all that corn, which he then saw.

"To my Lord Marquis of Carabas," replied the reapers, and the King was
very well pleased with it, as well as the Marquis, whom he congratulated
thereupon. The Master Cat, who went always before, said the same thing
to all he met, and the King was astonished at the vast estates of my
Lord Marquis of Carabas.

Monsieur Puss came at last to a stately castle, the master of which was
an Ogre, the richest ever known; for all the lands which the King had
then passed through belonged to this castle. The Cat, who had taken care
to inform himself who this Ogre was and what he could do, asked to speak
with him, saying he could not pass so near his castle without having the
honor of paying his respects to him.

The Ogre received him as civilly as an Ogre could do, and made him sit
down.

"I have been assured," said the Cat, "that you have the gift of being
able to change yourself into all sorts of creatures you have a mind to;
that you can, for example, transform yourself into a lion, or elephant,
and the like."

"That is true," answered the Ogre, roughly; "and to convince you, you
shall see me now become a lion."

Puss was so terrified at the sight of a lion so near him that he
immediately climbed into the gutter, not without much trouble and
danger, because of his boots, which were of no use at all to him for
walking upon the tiles. A little while after, when Puss saw that the
Ogre had resumed his natural form, he came down, and owned he had been
very much frightened.

"I have, moreover, been informed," said the Cat, "but I know not how to
believe it, that; you have also the power to take on you the shape of
the smallest animals; for example, to change yourself into a rat or a
mouse, but I must own to you I take this to be impossible."

"Impossible!" cried the Ogre; "you shall see." And at the same time he
changed himself into a mouse, and began to run about the floor. Puss no
sooner perceived this than he fell upon him and ate him up.

Meanwhile, the King, who saw, as he passed, this fine castle of the
Ogre's, had a mind to go into it. Puss, who heard the noise of his
Majesty's coach coming over the drawbridge, ran out, and said to the
King, "Your Majesty is welcome to this castle of my Lord Marquis of
Carabas."

"What! my Lord Marquis," cried the King, "and does this castle also
belong to you? There can be nothing finer than this courtyard and all
the stately buildings which surround it; let us see the interior, if you
please."

The Marquis gave his hand to the young Princess, and followed the King,
who went first. They passed into the great hall, where they found a
magnificent collation, which the Ogre had prepared for his friends, who
were that very day to visit him, but dared not to enter, knowing the
King was there. His Majesty, charmed with the good qualities of my Lord
of Carabas, as was also his daughter, who had fallen violently in love
with him, and seeing the vast estate he possessed, said to him:--

"It will be owing to yourself only, my Lord Marquis, if you are not my
son-in-law."

The Marquis, with low bows, accepted the honor which his Majesty
conferred upon him, and forthwith that very same day married the
Princess.

Puss became a great lord, and never ran after mice any more except for
his diversion.




RIQUET WITH THE TUFT.


Once upon a time there was a Queen who had a son so ugly and so
misshapen that it was long disputed whether he had human form. A fairy
who was at his birth said, however, that he would be very amiable for
all that, since he would have uncommon good sense. She even added that
it would be in his power, by virtue of a gift she had just then given
him, to bestow as much sense as he pleased on the person he loved the
best. All this somewhat comforted the poor Queen. It is true that this
child no sooner began to talk than he said a thousand pretty things, and
in all his actions there was an intelligence that was quite charming. I
forgot to tell you that he was born with a little tuft of hair upon his
head, which made them call him Riquet[1] with the Tuft, for Riquet was
the family name.

[Footnote 1: R[=e]k[=a].]

Seven or eight years later the Queen of a neighboring kingdom had two
daughters who were twins. The first born of these was more beautiful
than the day; whereat the Queen was so very glad that those present were
afraid that her excess of joy would do her harm. The same fairy who was
present at the birth of little Riquet with the Tuft was here also, and,
to moderate the Queen's gladness, she declared that this little Princess
should have no sense at all, but should be as stupid as she was pretty.
This mortified the Queen extremely; but afterward she had a far greater
sorrow, for the second daughter proved to be very ugly.

"Do not afflict yourself so much, madam," said the fairy. "Your daughter
shall have her recompense; she shall have so great a portion of sense
that the want of beauty will hardly be perceived."

"God grant it," replied the Queen; "but is there no way to make the
eldest, who is so pretty, have any sense?"

"I can do nothing for her, madam, as to sense," answered the fairy, "but
everything as to beauty; and as there is nothing I would not do for your
satisfaction, I give her for gift that she shall have power to make
handsome the person who shall best please her."

As these princesses grew up, their perfections grew with them. All the
public talk was of the beauty of the elder and the rare good sense of
the younger. It is true also that their defects increased considerably
with their age. The younger visibly grew uglier and uglier, and the
elder became every day more and more stupid: she either made no answer
at all to what was asked her, or said something very silly. She was with
all this so unhandy that she could not place four pieces of china upon
the mantelpiece without breaking one of them, nor drink a glass of water
without spilling half of it upon her clothes.

Although beauty is a very great advantage in young people, the younger
sister was always the more preferred in society. People would indeed go
first to the Beauty to look upon and admire her, but turn aside soon
after to the Wit to hear a thousand most entertaining and agreeable
things; and it was amazing to see, in less than a quarter of an hour's
time, the elder with not a soul near her, and the whole company crowding
about the younger. The elder, dull as she was, could not fail to notice
this; and without the slightest regret would have given all her beauty
to have half her sister's wit. The Queen, prudent as she was, could not
help reproaching her several times for her stupidity, which almost made
the poor Princess die of grief.

One day, as she had hidden herself in a wood to bewail her misfortune,
she saw coming to her a very disagreeable little man, but most
magnificently dressed. This was the young Prince Riquet with the Tuft,
who having fallen in love with her upon seeing her picture,--many of
which were distributed all the world over,--had left his father's
kingdom to have the pleasure of seeing and talking with her. Overjoyed
to find her thus alone, he addressed himself to her with all imaginable
politeness and respect. Having observed, after he had paid her the
ordinary compliments, that she was extremely melancholy, he said to
her:--

"I cannot comprehend, madam, how a person so beautiful as you are can be
so sorrowful as you seem to be; for though I can boast of having seen a
great number of exquisitely charming ladies, I can say that I never
beheld any one whose beauty approaches yours."

"You are pleased to say so," answered the Princess, and here she
stopped.

"Beauty," replied Riquet with the Tuft, "is such a great advantage, that
it ought to take place of all things besides; and since you possess this
treasure, I can see nothing that can possibly very much afflict you."

"I had far rather," cried the Princess, "be as ugly as you are, and have
sense, than have the beauty I possess, and be as stupid as I am."

"There is nothing, madam," returned he, "shows more that we have good
sense than to believe we have none; and it is the nature of that
excellent quality that the more people have of it, the more they believe
they want it."

"I do not know that," said the Princess; "but I know very well that I
am very senseless, and that vexes me mightily."

"If that be all which troubles you, madam, I can very easily put an end
to your affliction."

"And how will you do that?" cried the Princess.

"I have the power, madam," replied Riquet with the Tuft, "to give to
that person whom I love best as much good sense as can be had; and as
you, madam, are that very person, it will be your fault only if you have
not as great a share of it as any one living, provided you will be
pleased to marry me."

The Princess was quite confused, and answered not a word.

"I see," replied Riquet with the Tuft, "that this proposal does not
please you, and I do not wonder at it; but I will give you a whole year
to consider it."

The Princess had so little sense and, at the same time, so great a
longing to have some, that she imagined the end of that year would never
come, so she accepted the proposal which was made her.

She had no sooner promised Riquet with the Tuft that she would marry him
on that day twelvemonth than she found herself quite otherwise than she
was before: she had an incredible faculty of speaking whatever she had
in her mind in a polite, easy, and natural manner.

She began that moment a very gallant conversation with Riquet with the
Tuft, which she kept up at such a rate that Riquet with the Tuft
believed he had given her more sense than he had reserved for himself.

When she returned to the palace, the whole court knew not what to think
of such a sudden and extraordinary change; for they heard from her now
as much sensible discourse and as many infinitely witty phrases as they
had heard stupid and silly impertinences before. The whole court was
overjoyed beyond imagination at it. It pleased all but her younger
sister, because, having no longer the advantage of her in respect of
wit, she appeared in comparison with her a very disagreeable, homely
girl.

The King governed himself by her advice, and would even sometimes hold a
council in her apartment. The news of this change in the Princess spread
everywhere; the young princes of the neighboring kingdoms strove all
they could to gain her favor, and almost all of them asked her in
marriage; but she found not one of them had sense enough for her. She
gave them all a hearing, but would not engage herself to any.

However, there came one so powerful, so rich, so witty, and so handsome
that she could not help feeling a strong inclination toward him. Her
father perceived it, and told her that she was her own mistress as to
the choice of a husband, and that she might declare her intentions. She
thanked her father, and desired him to give her time to consider it.

She went by chance to walk in the same wood where she met Riquet with
the Tuft, the more conveniently to think what she ought to do. While she
was walking in a profound meditation, she heard a confused noise under
her feet, as it were of a great many people busily running backward and
forward. Listening more attentively, she heard one say:--

"Bring me that pot," another, "Give me that kettle," and a third, "Put
some wood upon the fire."

The ground at the same time opened, and she saw under her feet a great
kitchen full of cooks, kitchen helps, and all sorts of officers
necessary for a magnificent entertainment. There came out of it a
company of cooks, to the number of twenty or thirty, who went to plant
themselves about a very long table set up in the forest, with their
larding pins in their hands and fox tails in their caps, and began to
work, keeping time to a very harmonious tune.

The Princess, all astonished at this sight, asked them for whom they
worked.

"For Prince Riquet with the Tuft," said the chief of them, "who is to be
married to-morrow."

The Princess, more surprised than ever, and recollecting all at once
that it was now that day twelvemonth on which she had promised to marry
the Prince Riquet with the Tuft, was ready to sink into the ground.

What made her forget this was that when she made this promise, she was
very silly; and having obtained that vast stock of sense which the
prince had bestowed upon her, she had entirely forgotten the things she
had done in the days of her stupidity. She continued her walk, but had
not taken thirty steps before Riquet with the Tuft presented himself to
her, gallant and most magnificently dressed, like a prince who was going
to be married.

"You see, madam," said he, "I am exact in keeping my word, and doubt not
in the least but you are come hither to perform your promise."

"I frankly confess," answered the Princess, "that I have not yet come to
a decision in this matter, and I believe I never shall be able to arrive
at such a one as you desire."

"You astonish me, madam," said Riquet with the Tuft.

"I can well believe it," said the Princess; "and surely if I had to do
with a clown, or a man of no sense, I should find myself very much at a
loss. 'A princess always keeps her word,' he would say to me, 'and you
must marry me, since you promised to do so.' But as he to whom I talk
is the one man in the world who is master of the greatest sense and
judgment, I am sure he will hear reason. You know that when I was but a
fool I could scarcely make up my mind to marry you; why will you have
me, now I have so much judgment as you gave me, come to such a decision
which I could not then make up my mind to agree to? If you sincerely
thought to make me your wife, you have been greatly in the wrong to
deprive me of my dull simplicity, and make me see things much more
clearly than I did."

"If a man of no wit and sense," replied Riquet with the Tuft, "would be
well received, as you say, in reproaching you for breach of your word,
why will you not let me, madam, have the same usage in a matter wherein
all the happiness of my life is concerned? Is it reasonable that persons
of wit and sense should be in a worse condition than those who have
none? Can you pretend this, you who have so great a share, and desired
so earnestly to have it? But let us come to the fact, if you please.
Putting aside my ugliness and deformity, is there anything in me which
displeased you? Are you dissatisfied with my birth, my wit, my humor, or
my manners?"

"Not at all," answered the Princess; "I love you and respect you in all
that you mention."

[Illustration: "I AM EXACT IN KEEPING MY WORD." p. 61.]

"If it be so," said Riquet with the Tuft, "I am happy, since it is in
your power to make me the most amiable of men."

"How can that be?" said the Princess.

"It is done," said Riquet with the Tuft, "if you love me enough to wish
it was so; and that you may no ways doubt, madam, of what I say, know
that the same fairy who on my birthday gave me for gift the power of
making the person who should please me witty and judicious, has in like
manner given you for gift the power of making him whom you love and to
whom you would grant the favor, to be extremely handsome."

"If it be so," said the Princess, "I wish with all my heart that you may
be the most lovable prince in the world, and I bestow my gift on you as
much as I am able."

The Princess had no sooner pronounced these words than Riquet with the
Tuft appeared to her the finest prince upon earth, the handsomest and
most amiable man she ever saw. Some affirm that it was not the fairy's
charms, but love alone, which worked the change.

They say that the Princess, having made due reflection on the
perseverance of her lover, his discretion, and all the good qualities of
his mind, his wit and judgment, saw no longer the deformity of his body,
nor the ugliness of his face; that his hump seemed to her no more than
the grand air of one having a broad back, and that whereas till then
she saw him limp horribly, she now found it nothing more than a certain
sidling air, which charmed her.

They say further that his eyes, which were squinted very much, seemed to
her most bright and sparkling, that their irregularity passed in her
judgment for a mark of the warmth of his affection, and, in short, that
his great red nose was, in her opinion, somewhat martial and heroic in
character.

However it was, the Princess promised immediately to marry him, on
condition that he obtained the King's consent. The King, knowing that
his daughter highly esteemed Riquet with the Tuft, whom he knew also for
a most sage and judicious prince, received him for his son-in-law with
pleasure, and the next morning their nuptials were celebrated, as Riquet
with the Tuft had foreseen, and according to the orders he had given a
long time before.




BLUE BEARD.


Once upon a time there was a man who had fine houses, both in town and
country, a deal of silver and gold plate, carved furniture, and coaches
gilded all over. But unhappily this man had a blue beard, which made him
so ugly and so terrible that all the women and girls ran away from him.

One of his neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were
perfect beauties. He asked for one of them in marriage, leaving to her
the choice of which she would bestow on him. They would neither of them
have him, and they sent him backward and forward from one to the other,
neither being able to make up her mind to marry a man who had a blue
beard. Another thing which made them averse to him was that he had
already married several wives, and nobody knew what had become of them.

Blue Beard, to become better acquainted, took them, with their mother
and three or four of their best friends, with some young people of the
neighborhood to one of his country seats, where they stayed a whole
week.

There was nothing going on but pleasure parties, hunting, fishing,
dancing, mirth, and feasting. Nobody went to bed, but all passed the
night in playing pranks on each other. In short, everything succeeded so
well that the youngest daughter began to think that the beard of the
master of the house was not so very blue, and that he was a very civil
gentleman. So as soon as they returned home, the marriage was concluded.

About a month afterward Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to
take a country journey for six weeks at least, upon business of great
importance. He desired her to amuse herself well in his absence, to send
for her friends, to take them into the country, if she pleased, and to
live well wherever she was.

"Here," said he, "are the keys of the two great warehouses wherein I
have my best furniture: these are of the room where I keep my silver and
gold plate, which is not in everyday use; these open my safes, which
hold my money, both gold and silver; these my caskets of jewels; and
this is the master-key to all my apartments. But as for this little key,
it is the key of the closet at the end of the great gallery on the
ground floor. Open them all; go everywhere; but as for that little
closet, I forbid you to enter it, and I promise you surely that, if you
open it, there's nothing that you may not expect from my anger."

She promised to obey exactly all his orders; and he, after having
embraced her, got into his coach and proceeded on his journey.

Her neighbors and good friends did not stay to be sent for by the
new-married lady, so great was their impatience to see all the riches of
her house, not daring to come while her husband was there, because of
his blue beard, which frightened them. They at once ran through all the
rooms, closets, and wardrobes, which were so fine and rich, and each
seemed to surpass all others. They went up into the warehouses, where
was the best and richest furniture; and they could not sufficiently
admire the number and beauty of the tapestry, beds, couches, cabinets,
stands, tables, and looking-glasses, in which you might see yourself
from head to foot. Some of them were framed with glass, others with
silver, plain and gilded, the most beautiful and the most magnificent
ever seen.


[Illustration: "IF YOU OPEN IT, THERE'S NOTHING YOU MAY NOT EXPECT
FROM MY ANGER." p. 67.]

They ceased not to praise and envy the happiness of their friend, who,
in the meantime, was not at all amused by looking upon all these rich
things, because of her impatience to go and open the closet on the
ground floor. Her curiosity was so great that, without considering how
uncivil it was to leave her guests, she went down a little back
staircase, with such excessive haste that twice or thrice she came near
breaking her neck. Having reached the closet-door, she stood still for
some time, thinking of her husband's orders, and considering that
unhappiness might attend her if she was disobedient; but the temptation
was so strong she could not overcome it. She then took the little key,
and opened the door, trembling. At first she could not see anything
plainly, because the windows were shut. After some moments she began to
perceive that several dead women were scattered about the floor. (These
were all the wives whom Blue Beard had married and murdered, one after
the other, because they did not obey his orders about the closet on the
ground floor.) She thought she surely would die for fear, and the key,
which she pulled out of the lock, fell out of her hand.

After having somewhat recovered from the shock, she picked up the key,
locked the door, and went upstairs into her chamber to compose herself;
but she could not rest, so much was she frightened.

Having observed that the key of the closet was stained, she tried two or
three times to wipe off the stain, but the stain would not come out. In
vain did she wash it, and even rub it with soap and sand. The stain
still remained, for the key was a magic key, and she could never make it
quite clean; when the stain was gone off from one side, it came again on
the other.

Blue Beard returned from his journey that same evening, and said he had
received letters upon the road, informing him that the business which
called him away was ended to his advantage. His wife did all she could
to convince him she was delighted at his speedy return.

Next morning he asked her for the keys, which she gave him, but with
such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened.

"How is it," said he, "that the key of my closet is not among the rest?"

"I must certainly," said she, "have left it upstairs upon the table."

"Do not fail," said Blue Beard, "to bring it to me presently."

After having put off doing it several times, she was forced to bring him
the key. Blue Beard, having examined it, said to his wife:--

"How comes this stain upon the key?"

"I do not know," cried the poor woman, paler than death.

"You do not know!" replied Blue Beard. "I very well know. You wished to
go into the cabinet? Very well, madam; you shall go in, and take your
place among the ladies you saw there."

She threw herself weeping at her husband's feet, and begged his pardon
with all the signs of a true repentance for her disobedience. She would
have melted a rock, so beautiful and sorrowful was she; but Blue Beard
had a heart harder than any stone.

"You must die, madam," said he, "and that at once."

"Since I must die," answered she, looking upon him with her eyes all
bathed in tears, "give me some little time to say my prayers."

"I give you," replied Blue Beard, "half a quarter of an hour, but not
one moment more."

When she was alone she called out to her sister, and said to her:--

"Sister Anne,"--for that was her name,--"go up, I beg you, to the top of
the tower, and look if my brothers are not coming; they promised me they
would come to-day, and if you see them, give them a sign to make haste."

Her sister Anne went up to the top of the tower, and the poor afflicted
wife cried out from time to time:--

"Anne, sister Anne, do you see any one coming?"

And sister Anne said:--

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which
looks green."

In the meanwhile Blue Beard, holding a great sabre in his hand, cried to
his wife as loud as he could:--

"Come down instantly, or I shall come up to you."

"One moment longer, if you please," said his wife; and then she cried
out very softly, "Anne, sister Anne, dost thou see anybody coming?"

And sister Anne answered:--

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which is
green."

"Come down quickly," cried Blue Beard, "or I will come up to you."

"I am coming," answered his wife; and then she cried, "Anne, sister
Anne, dost thou not see any one coming?"

"I see," replied sister Anne, "a great dust, which comes from this
side."

"Are they my brothers?"

"Alas! no, my sister, I see a flock of sheep."

"Will you not come down?" cried Blue Beard.

"One moment longer," said his wife, and then she cried out, "Anne,
sister Anne, dost thou see nobody coming?"

"I see," said she, "two horsemen, but they are yet a great way off."

"God be praised," replied the poor wife, joyfully; "they are my
brothers; I will make them a sign, as well as I can, for them to make
haste."

Then Blue Beard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house tremble.
The distressed wife came down and threw herself at his feet, all in
tears, with her hair about her shoulders.

"All this is of no help to you," says Blue Beard: "you must die;" then,
taking hold of her hair with one hand, and lifting up his sword in the
air with the other, he was about to take off her head. The poor lady,
turning about to him, and looking at him with dying eyes, desired him to
afford her one little moment to her thoughts.

"No, no," said he, "commend thyself to God," and again lifting his arm--

At this moment there was such a loud knocking at the gate that Blue
Beard stopped suddenly. The gate was opened, and presently entered two
horsemen, who, with sword in hand, ran directly to Blue Beard. He knew
them to be his wife's brothers, one a dragoon, the other a musketeer. He
ran away immediately, but the two brothers pursued him so closely that
they overtook him before he could get to the steps of the porch. There
they ran their swords through his body, and left him dead. The poor wife
was almost as dead as her husband, and had not strength enough to arise
and welcome her brothers.

Blue Beard had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his
estate. She made use of one portion of it to marry her sister Anne to a
young gentleman who had loved her a long while; another portion to buy
captains' commissions for her brothers; and the rest to marry herself to
a very worthy gentleman, who made her forget the sorry time she had
passed with Blue Beard.




THE FAIRY.


Once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters. The elder was
so much like her, both in looks and character, that whoever saw the
daughter saw the mother. They were both so disagreeable and so proud
that there was no living with them. The younger, who was the very
picture of her father for sweetness of temper and virtue, was withal one
of the most beautiful girls ever seen. As people naturally love their
own likeness, this mother doted on her elder daughter, and at the same
time had a great aversion for the younger. She made her eat in the
kitchen and work continually.

Among other things, this unfortunate child had to go twice a day to draw
water more than a mile and a half from the house, and bring home a
pitcherful of it. One day, as she was at this fountain, there came to
her a poor woman, who begged of her to let her drink.

"Oh, yes, with all my heart, Goody," said this pretty little girl.
Rinsing the pitcher at once, she took some of the clearest water from
the fountain, and gave it to her, holding up the pitcher all the while,
that she might drink the easier.

The good woman having drunk, said to her:--

"You are so pretty, so good and courteous, that I cannot help giving you
a gift." For this was a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor
country-woman, to see how far the civility and good manners of this
pretty girl would go. "I will give you for gift," continued the Fairy,
"that, at every word you speak, there shall come out of your mouth
either a flower or a jewel."

When this pretty girl returned, her mother scolded at her for staying so
long at the fountain.

"I beg your pardon, mamma," said the poor girl, "for not making more
haste."

And in speaking these words there came out of her mouth two roses, two
pearls, and two large diamonds.

"What is it I see there?" said her mother, quite astonished. "I think
pearls and diamonds come out of the girl's mouth! How happens this, my
child?"

This was the first time she had ever called her "my child."

The girl told her frankly all the matter, not without dropping out great
numbers of diamonds.

"Truly," cried the mother, "I must send my own dear child thither.
Fanny, look at what comes out of your sister's mouth when she speaks.
Would you not be glad, my dear, to have the same gift? You have only to
go and draw water out of the fountain, and when a poor woman asks you
to let her drink, to give it to her very civilly."

[Illustration: "WITH ALL MY HEART, GOODY." p. 75.]

"I should like to see myself going to the fountain to draw water," said
this ill-bred minx.

"I insist you shall go," said the mother, "and that instantly."

She went, but grumbled all the way, taking with her the best silver
tankard in the house.

She no sooner reached the fountain than she saw coming out of the wood,
a magnificently dressed lady, who came up to her, and asked to drink.
This was the same fairy who had appeared to her sister, but she had now
taken the air and dress of a princess, to see how far this girl's
rudeness would go.

"Am I come hither," said the proud, ill-bred girl, "to serve you with
water, pray? I suppose this silver tankard was brought purely for your
ladyship, was it? However, you may drink out of it, if you have a
fancy."

"You are scarcely polite," answered the fairy, without anger. "Well,
then, since you are so disobliging, I give you for gift that at every
word you speak there shall come out of your mouth a snake or a toad."

So soon as her mother saw her coming, she cried out:--

"Well, daughter?"

"Well, mother?" answered the unhappy girl, throwing out of her mouth a
viper and a toad.

"Oh, mercy!" cried the mother, "what is it I see? It is her sister who
has caused all this, but she shall pay for it," and immediately she ran
to beat her. The poor child fled away from her, and went to hide herself
in the forest nearby.

The King's son, who was returning from the chase, met her, and seeing
her so beautiful, asked her what she did there alone and why she cried.

"Alas! sir, my mother has turned me out of doors."

The King's son, who saw five or six pearls and as many diamonds come out
of her mouth, desired her to tell him how that happened. She told him
the whole story. The King's son fell in love with her, and, considering
that such a gift was worth more than any marriage portion another bride
could bring, conducted her to the palace of the King, his father, and
there married her.

As for her sister, she made herself so much hated that her own mother
turned her out of doors. The miserable girl, after wandering about and
finding no one to take her in, went to a corner of the wood, and there
died.




LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD.


Once upon a time there lived in a certain village a little country girl,
the prettiest creature that ever was seen. Her mother was very fond of
her, and her grandmother loved her still more. This good woman made for
her a little red riding-hood, which became the girl so well that
everybody called her Little Red Riding-hood.

One day her mother, having made some custards, said to her:--

"Go, my dear, and see how your grandmother does, for I hear she has been
very ill; carry her a custard and this little pot of butter."

Little Red Riding-hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother's,
who lived in another village.

As she was going through the wood, she met Gaffer Wolf, who had a very
great mind to eat her up; but he dared not, because of some fagot-makers
hard by in the forest. He asked her whither she was going. The poor
child, who did not know that it was dangerous to stay and hear a wolf
talk, said to him:--

"I am going to see my grandmother, and carry her a custard and a little
pot of butter from my mamma."

"Does she live far off?" said the Wolf.

"Oh, yes," answered Little Red Riding-hood; "it is beyond that mill you
see there, the first house you come to in the village."

"Well," said the Wolf, "and I'll go and see her, too. I'll go this way,
and you go that, and we shall see who will be there first."

The Wolf began to run as fast as he could, taking the shortest way, and
the little girl went by the longest way, amusing herself by gathering
nuts, running after butterflies, and making nosegays of such little
flowers as she met with. The Wolf was not long before he reached the old
woman's house. He knocked at the door--tap, tap, tap.

"Who's there?" called the grandmother.

"Your grandchild, Little Red Riding-hood," replied the Wolf, imitating
her voice, "who has brought a custard and a little pot of butter sent to
you by mamma."

The good grandmother, who was in bed, because she was somewhat ill,
cried out:--

"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."

The Wolf pulled the bobbin, and the door opened. He fell upon the good
woman and ate her up in no time, for he had not eaten anything for more
than three days. He then shut the door, went into the grandmother's
bed, and waited for Little Red Riding-hood, who came sometime afterward
and knocked at the door--tap, tap, tap.

"Who's there?" called the Wolf.

Little Red Riding-hood, hearing the big voice of the Wolf, was at first
afraid; but thinking her grandmother had a cold, answered:--

"'Tis your grandchild, Little Red Riding-hood, who has brought you a
custard and a little pot of butter sent to you by mamma."

The Wolf cried out to her, softening his voice a little:--

"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."

Little Red Riding-hood pulled the bobbin, and the door opened.

The Wolf, seeing her come in, said to her, hiding himself under the
bedclothes:--

"Put the custard and the little pot of butter upon the stool, and come
and lie down with me."

Little Red Riding-hood undressed herself and went into bed, where she
was much surprised to see how her grandmother looked in her
night-clothes.

She said to her:--

"Grandmamma, what great arms you have got!"

"That is the better to hug thee, my dear."

"Grandmamma, what great legs you have got!"

[Illustration: "HE FELL UPON THE GOOD WOMAN." p. 81.]


"That is to run the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great ears you have got!"

"That is to hear the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great eyes you have got!"

"It is to see the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great teeth you have got!"

"That is to eat thee up."

And, saying these words, this wicked Wolf fell upon Little Red
Riding-hood, and ate her all up.




NOTE.


The eight stories contained in this volume are first found in print in
French in a magazine entitled, _Receuil de pièces curieuses et nouvelles
tant en prose qu'en vers_, which was published by Adrian Moetjens at The
Hague in 1696-1697. They were immediately afterward published at Paris
in a volume entitled, _Histoires ou Contes du Temps PassE avec des
Moralites--Contes de ma mère l'Oie_.

The earliest translation into English has been found in a little book
containing both the English and French, entitled, "Tales of Passed
Times, by Mother Goose. With Morals. Written in French by M. (Charles)
Perrault, and Englished by R.S. Gent."

Who R.S. was and when he made his translation we can only conjecture.
Mr. Andrew Lang, in his "Perrault's Popular Tales" (p. xxxiv), writes:
"An English version translated by Mr. Samber, printed for J. Pote, was
advertised, Mr. Austin Dobson tells me, in the _Monthly Chronicle_,
March, 1729."

These stories which may be said to be as old as the race
itself--certainly their germs are to be found in the oldest literature
and among the oldest folk-tales in the world--were orally current in
France and the neighboring countries in nearly the form in which
Perrault wrote them for very many years; and an interesting account of
the various forms in which they are found in the literature and
folklore of other nations before Perrault's time is given in _Les Contes
de ma mère l'Oie avant Perrault_, by Charles Deulin, Paris, E. Dentu,
1878.

In this book Mr. Deulin inclines to the view that the stories as first
published by Perrault were not really written by him, but by his little
son of ten or eleven, to whom Perrault told the stories as he had
gathered them up with the intention of rendering them in verse after the
manner of La Fontaine. The lad had an excellent memory, much natural
wit, and a great gift of expression. He loved the stories his father
told him and thoroughly enjoyed the task his father set him of rewriting
them from memory, as an exercise. This was so happily done, in such a
fresh, artless, and engaging style, exactly befitting the subjects of
the stories, that the father found the son's version better than the one
he had contemplated and gave that to the world instead.

These stories made their way slowly in England at first, but in the end
they nearly eclipsed the native fairy tales and legends, which, owing to
Puritan influence, had been frowned upon and discouraged until they were
remembered only in the remoter districts, and told only by the few who
had not come under its sway. Indeed, the Puritanical objection to
nursery lore of all kinds still lingers in some corners of England.

The stories of Perrault came in just when the severer manifestations of
Puritanism were beginning to decline, and they have since become as much
a part of English fairy lore as the old English folk and fairy tales
themselves. These latter, thanks to Mr. Joseph Jacob, Mr. Andrew Lang,
Mr. E.S. Hartland, and others, have been unearthed and revived, and
prove to have lost nothing of their power of taking hold upon the minds
of the little folk.

Perrault says of his collection that it is certain these stories excite
in the children who read them the desire to resemble those characters
who become happy, and at the same time they inspire them with the fear
of the consequences which happen to those who do ill deeds; and he
claims that they all contain a very distinct moral which is more or less
evident to all who read them.

Emerson says: "What Nature at one time provides for use, she afterwards
turns to ornament," and Herbert Spencer, following out this idea,
remarks that "the fairy lore, which in times past was matter of grave
belief and held sway over people's conduct, has since been transformed
into ornament for _The Midsummer Night's Dream_, _The Tempest_, _The
Fairy Queen_, and endless small tales and poems; and still affords
subjects for children's story books, amuses boys and girls, and becomes
matter for jocose allusion."

Thus, also, Sir Walter Scott, in a note to "The Lady of the Lake," says:
"The mythology of one period would appear to pass into the romance of
the next, and that into the nursery tales of subsequent ages," and Max
MEler, in his "Chips from a German Workshop," says: "The gods of
ancient mythology were changed into the demigods and heroes of ancient
epic poetry, and these demigods again became at a later age the
principal characters of our nursery tales."

These thoughts may help to a better understanding of some of the uses of
such stories and of their proper place in children's reading.

C.W.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Tales of Mother Goose, by Charles Perrault

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALES OF MOTHER GOOSE ***

***** This file should be named 17208-8.txt or 17208-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/2/0/17208/

Produced by Geetu Melwani, Suzanne Shell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

