Boycott Amazon!

[ [image of a Philosophical Gnu] ]  [ English | French | Italian | Japanese

| Korean | Russian ]

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

If you support the boycott,
Please make links to this page
http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/amazon.html !!!!

Table of Contents

   * Why We Boycott Amazon
   * Why the Boycott Continues Given that the Suit has Settled
   * Updates and Links

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Why we boycott Amazon

Amazon has obtained a US patent (5,960,411) on an important and obvious
idea for E-commerce: an idea sometimes known as one-click purchasing. The
idea is that your command in a web browser to buy a certain item can carry
along information about your identity. (It works by sending the server a
"cookie", a kind of ID code that your browser received previously from the
same server.)

Amazon has sued to block the use of this simple idea, showing that they
truly intend to monopolize it. This is an attack against the World Wide Web
and against E-commerce in general.

The idea patented here is just that a company can give you something which
you can subsequently show them to identify yourself for credit. This is
nothing new: a physical credit card does the same job, after all. But the
US Patent Office issues patents on obvious and well-known ideas every day.
Sometimes the result is a disaster.

Today Amazon is suing one large company. If this were just a dispute
between two companies, it would not be an important public issue. But the
patent gives Amazon the power over anyone who runs a web site in the US
(and any other countries that give them similar patents)--power to control
all use of this technique. Although only one company is being sued today,
the issue affects the whole Internet.

Amazon is not alone at fault in what is happening. The US Patent Office is
to blame for having very low standards, and US courts are to blame for
endorsing them. And US patent law is to blame for authorizing patents on
information-manipulating techniques and patterns of communication--a policy
that is harmful in general. (See http://lpf.ai.mit.edu/ for more
information about the broader issue of software patents.)

Foolish government policies gave Amazon the opportunity--but an opportunity
is not an excuse. Amazon made the choice to obtain this patent, and the
choice to use it in court for aggression. The ultimate moral responsibility
for Amazon's actions lies with Amazon's executives.

We can hope that the court will find this patent is legally invalid,
Whether they do so will depend on detailed facts and obscure
technicalities. The patent uses piles of semirelevant detail to make this
"invention" look like something subtle.

But we do not have to wait passively for the court to decide the freedom of
E-commerce. There is something we can do right now: we can refuse to do
business with Amazon. Please do not buy anything from Amazon until they
promise to stop using this patent to threaten or restrict other web sites.

If you are the author of a book sold by Amazon, you can provide powerful
help to this campaign by putting this text into the "author comment" about
your book, on Amazon's web site. (Alas, it appears they are refusing to
post these comments for authors.)

If you have suggestions, or if you simply support the boycott, please send
mail to <amazon@gnu.org> to let us know.

Amazon's response to people who write about the patent contains a subtle
misdirection which is worth analyzing:

     The patent system is designed to encourage innovation, and we
     spent thousands of hours developing our 1-ClickR shopping
     feature.

If they did spend thousands of hours, they surely did not spend it thinking
of the general technique that the patent covers. So if they are telling the
truth, what did they spend those hours doing?

Perhaps they spent some of the time writing the patent application. That
task was surely harder than thinking of the technique. Or perhaps they are
talking about the time it took designing, writing, testing, and perfecting
the scripts and the web pages to handle one-click shopping. That was surely
a substantial job. Looking carefully at their words, it seems the
"thousands of hours developing" could include either of these two jobs.

But the issue here is not about the details in their particular scripts
(which they do not release to us) and web pages (which are copyrighted
anyway). The issue here is the general idea, and whether Amazon should have
a monopoly on that idea.

Are you, or I, free to spend the necessary hours writing our own scripts,
our own web pages, to provide one-click shopping? Even if we are selling
something other than books, are we free to do this? That is the question.
Amazon seeks to deny us that freedom, with the eager help of a misguided US
government.

When Amazon sends out cleverly misleading statements like the one quoted
above, it demonstrates something important: they do care what the public
thinks of their actions. They must care--they are a retailer. Public
disgust can affect their profits.

People have pointed out that the problem of software patents is much bigger
than Amazon, that other companies might have acted just the same, and that
boycotting Amazon won't directly change patent law. Of course, these are
all true. But that is no argument against this boycott!

If we mount the boycott strongly and lastingly, Amazon may eventually make
a concession to end it. And even if they do not, the next company which has
an outrageous software patent and considers suing someone will realize
there can be a price to pay. They may have second thoughts.

The boycott can also indirectly help change patent law--by calling
attention to the issue and spreading demand for change. And it is so easy
to participate that there is no need to be deterred on that account. If you
agree about the issue, why not boycott Amazon?

To help spread the word, please put a note about the boycott on your own
personal web page, and on institutional pages as well if you can. Make a
link to this page; updated information will be placed here.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Why the Boycott Continues Given that the Suit has Settled

Amazon.com reported in March 2002 that it had settled its long-running
patent-infringement suit against Barnes and Noble over its 1-Click checkout
system. The details of the settlement were not disclosed.

Since the terms were not disclosed, we have no way of knowing whether this
represents a defeat for Amazon such as would justify ending the boycott.
Thus, we encourage everyone to continue the boycott.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Updates and Links

In this section, we list updates and links about issues related to
Amazon.com, their business practices, and stories related to the boycott.
New information is added to the bottom of this section.

Tim O'Reilly has sent Amazon an open letter disapproving of the use of this
patent, stating the position about as forcefully as possible given an
unwillingness to stop doing business with them.

Richard M. Stallman has written a letter to Tim O'Reilly in regard to the
statement by Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, which called for software patents
to last just 3 or 5 years.

Paul Barton-Davis <pbd@op.net>, one of the founding programmers at Amazon,
writes about the Amazon Boycott.

Nat Friedman wrote in with an Amazon Boycott success story.

On the side, Amazon is doing other obnoxious things in another courtroom,
too.

The FTC has also made several questionable decisions regarding Amazon and
consumer privacy.

See http://lpf.ai.mit.edu/ for more information about the broader issue of
software patents.

A group of Amazon employees are trying to unionize.

Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility have dropped their
affiliation with Amazon.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Other Philosophical Texts to Read

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Return to GNU's home page.

Please send FSF & GNU inquiries & questions to gnu@gnu.org. There are also
other ways to contact the FSF.

Please send comments on these web pages to webmasters@gnu.org, send other
questions to gnu@gnu.org.

Copyright (C) 1999, 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place -
Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111, USA

Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted in
any medium, provided this notice is preserved.

Updated: $Date: 2002/03/17 20:31:25 $ $Author: bkuhn $
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
