The Short Proof of EvolutionThe Short Proof of Evolution
by
Ian Johnston
[This document is in the public domain and may be used, in whole or in part, 
without charge and without permission, by anyone, provided the source is 
acknowledged.  Last revised in July 2001] 
We live, we are constantly told, in a scientific age. We look to science to help 
us achieve the good life, to solve our problems (especially our medical aches 
and pains), and to tell us about the world. A great deal of our education 
system, particularly the post-secondary curriculum, is organized as science or 
social science. And yet, curiously enough, there is one major scientific truth 
which vast numbers of people refuse to accept (by some news accounts a majority 
of people in North America)--the fact of evolution. Yet it is as plain as plain 
can be that the scientific truth of evolution is so overwhelmingly established, 
that it is virtually impossible to refute within the bounds of reason. No major 
scientific truth, in fact, is easier to present, explain, and defend. 
Before demonstrating this claim, let me make it clear what I mean by evolution, 
since there often is some confusion about the term. By evolution I mean, very 
simply, the development of animal and plant species out of other species not at 
all like them, for example, the process by which, say, a species of fish gets 
transformed (or evolves) through various stages into a cow, a kangaroo, or an 
eagle. This definition, it should be noted, makes no claims about how the 
process might occur, and thus it certainly does not equate the concept of 
evolution with Darwinian Natural Selection, as so many people seem to do. It 
simply defines the term by its effects (not by how those effects are produced, 
which could well be the subject of another argument). 
The first step in demonstrating the truth of evolution is to make the claim that 
all living creatures must have a living parent. This point has been 
overwhelmingly established in the past century and a half, ever since the French 
scientist Louis Pasteur demonstrated how fermentation took place and thus laid 
to rest centuries of stories about beetles arising spontaneously out of dung or 
gut worms being miraculously produced from non-living material. There is 
absolutely no evidence for this ancient belief. Living creatures must come from 
other living creatures. It does no damage to this point to claim that life must 
have had some origin way back in time, perhaps in a chemical reaction of 
inorganic materials (in some primordial soup) or in some invasion from outer 
space. That may well be true. But what is clear is that any such origin for 
living things or living material must result in a very simple organism. There is 
no evidence whatsoever (except in science fiction like Frankenstein) that 
inorganic chemical processes can produce complex, multi-cellular living 
creatures (the recent experiments cloning sheep, of course, are based on living 
tissue from other sheep). 
The second important point in the case for evolution is that some living 
creatures are very different from some others. This, I take it, is self-evident. 
Let me cite a common example: many animals have what we call an internal 
skeletal structure featuring a backbone and skull. We call these animals 
vertebrates. Most animals do not have these features (we call them 
invertebrates). The distinction between vertebrates and invertebrates is 
something no one who cares to look at samples of both can reasonably deny, and, 
so far as I am aware, no one hostile to evolution has ever denied a fact so 
apparent to anyone who observes the world for a few moments. 
The final point in the case for evolution is this: simple animals and plants 
existed on earth long before more complex ones (invertebrate animals, for 
example, were around for a very long time before there were any vertebrates). 
Here again, the evidence from fossils is overwhelming. In the deepest rock 
layers, there are no signs of life. The first fossil remains are of very simple 
living things. As the strata get more recent, the variety and complexity of life 
increase (although not at a uniform rate). In all the countless geological 
excavations and inspections (for example, of the Grand Canyon), no one has ever 
come up with a genuine fossil remnant which goes against this general principle 
(and it would only take one genuine find to overturn this principle). 
Well, if we put these three points together, the case for evolution is air 
tight. If all living creatures must have a living parent, if living creatures 
are different, and if simpler forms were around before the more complex forms, 
then the more complex forms must have come from the simpler forms (e.g., 
vertebrates from invertebrates). There is simply no other way of dealing 
reasonably with the evidence we have. Of course, one might deny (as some do) 
that the layers of the earth represent a succession of very lengthy epochs and 
claim, for example, that the Grand Canyon was created in a matter of days, but 
this surely violates scientific observation as much as does the claim that, say, 
vertebrates just, well, appeared one day out of a spontaneous combination of 
chemicals. 
To make the claim for the truth of evolution in this way is to assert nothing 
about how it might occur. Darwin provides one answer (through natural 
selection), but others have been suggested, too (including some which see a 
divine agency at work in the transforming process). The above argument is 
intended, however, to demonstrate that the general principle of evolution is, 
given the scientific evidence, logically unassailable and that, thus, the 
concept is a law of nature as truly established as is, say, gravitation. To deny 
evolution (as defined here) is on the same level of logic as to deny the fact 
that if someone jumps off the balcony of a high rise apartment and carries no 
special apparatus, she will fall towards the ground. That scientific certainty 
makes the widespread rejection of evolution in our modern age something of a 
puzzle (but that's a subject for another essay).  In a modern liberal democracy, 
of course, one is perfectly free to reject that conclusion, but one is not 
legitimately able to claim that such a rejection is a reasonable scientific 
stance. 
 



[For a more detailed treatment of the same issue, please see the following 
article "Creationism in the Science Curriculum?"]




Back to Top of This Document
Back to johnstonia Home Page


