Freedom-Or Copyright?

by Richard Stallman

[ [image of a Philosophical Gnu] ]  [ English | French | German | Italian |

Japanese | Korean | Polish | Russian ]

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once upon a time, in the age of the printing press, an industrial
regulation was established for the business of writing and publishing. It
was called copyright. Copyright's purpose was to encourage the publication
of a diversity of written works. Copyright's method was to make publishers
get permission from authors to reprint recent writings.

Ordinary readers had little reason to disapprove, since copyright
restricted only publication, not the things a reader could do. If it raised
the price of a book a small amount, that was only money. Copyright provided
a public benefit, as intended, with little burden on the public. It did its
job well-back then.

Then a new way of distributing information came about: computers and
networks. The advantage of digital information technology is that it
facilitates copying and manipulating information, including software,
musical recordings and books. Networks offered the possibility of unlimited
access to all sorts of data-an information utopia.

But one obstacle stood in the way: copyright. Readers who made use of their
computers to share published information were technically copyright
infringers. The world had changed, and what was once an industrial
regulation on publishers had become a restriction on the public it was
meant to serve.

In a democracy, a law that prohibits a popular, natural and useful activity
is usually soon relaxed. But the powerful publishers' lobby was determined
to prevent the public from taking advantage of the power of their
computers, and found copyright a suitable weapon. Under their influence,
rather than relaxing copyright to suit the new circumstances, governments
made it stricter than ever, imposing harsh penalties on readers caught
sharing.

But that wasn't the last of it. Computers can be powerful tools of
domination when a few people control what other people's computers do. The
publishers realized that by forcing people to use specially designated
software to read e-books, they can gain unprecedented power: they can
compel readers to pay, and identify themselves, every time they read a
book!

That is the publishers' dream, and they prevailed upon the U.S. government
to enact the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998. This law gives them
total legal power over almost anything a reader might do with an e-book.
Even reading it without authorization is a crime!

We still have the same old freedoms in using paper books. But if e-books
replace printed books, that exception will do little good. With "electronic
ink", which makes it possible to download new text onto an apparently
printed piece of paper, even newspapers could become ephemeral. Imagine: no
more used book stores; no more lending a book to your friend; no more
borrowing one from the public library-no more "leaks" that might give
someone a chance to read without paying. (And judging from the ads for
Microsoft Reader, no more anonymous purchasing of books either.) This is
the world publishers have in mind for us.

Why is there so little public debate about these momentous changes? Most
citizens have not yet had occasion to come to grips with the political
issues raised by this futuristic technology. Besides, the public has been
taught that copyright exists to "protect" the copyright holders, with the
implication that the public's interests do not count.

But when the public at large begins to use e-books, and discovers the
regime that the publishers have prepared for them, they will begin to
resist. Humanity will not accept this yoke forever.

The publishers would have us believe that suppressive copyright is the only
way to keep art alive, but we do not need a War on Copying to encourage a
diversity of published works; as the Grateful Dead showed, private copying
among fans is not necessarily a problem for artists. By legalizing the
copying of e-books among friends, we can turn copyright back into the
industrial regulation it once was.

For some kinds of writing, we should go even further. For scholarly papers
and monographs, everyone should be encouraged to republish them verbatim
online; this helps protect the scholarly record while making it more
accessible. For textbooks and most reference works, publication of modified
versions should be allowed as well, since that encourages improvement.

Eventually, when computer networks provide an easy way to send someone a
small amount of money, the whole rationale for restricting verbatim copying
will go away. If you like a book, and a box pops up on your computer saying
"Click here to give the author one dollar", wouldn't you click? Copyright
for books and music, as it applies to distributing verbatim unmodified
copies, will be entirely obsolete. And not a moment too soon!

Copyright (C) 2000 Richard Stallman. Verbatim copying and redistribution of
this entire article is permitted in any medium if this notice is preserved.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Other Texts to Read

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Return to GNU's home page.

FSF & GNU inquiries & questions to gnu@gnu.org. Other ways to contact the
FSF.

Comments on these web pages to webmasters@www.gnu.org, send other questions
to gnu@gnu.org.

Copyright (C) 2000 Richard Stallman

Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted in
any medium, provided this notice is preserved.

Updated: $Date: 2002/03/03 15:05:55 $ $Author: wkotwica $
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
