Free Software is More Reliable!

[ [image of the Head of a GNU] ]  [ Catalan | Chinese(Simplified) |

Chinese(Traditional) | English | French | Indonesian | Japanese |
Portuguese | Spanish ]

Apologists for proprietary software like to say, ``free software is a nice
dream, but we all know that only the proprietary system can produce
reliable products. A bunch of hackers just can't do this.''

Empirical evidence disagrees, however; scientific tests, described below,
have found GNU software to be more reliable than comparable proprietary
software.

This should not be a surprise; there are good reasons for the high
reliability of GNU software, good reasons to expect free software will
often (though not always) have high reliability.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of Contents

   * GNU Utilities Safer!
   * Why Free Software is More Reliable
   * Cancer Clinic Relies on Free Software!
   * Help Bulletproof GNU Utilities!

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

GNU Utilities Safer!

Barton P. Miller and his colleagues tested the reliability of Unix utility
programs in 1990 and 1995. Each time, GNU's utilities came out considerably
ahead. They tested seven commercial Unix systems as well as GNU. By
subjecting them to a random input stream, they could ``crash (with core
dump) or hang (infinite loop) over 40% (in the worst case) of the basic
utility programs ...''

These researchers found that the commercial Unix systems had a failure rate
that ranged from 15% to 43%. In contrast, the failure rate for GNU was only
7%.

Miller also said that, ``the three commercial systems that we compared in
both 1990 and 1995 noticeably improved in reliability, but still had
significant rates of failure (the basic utilities from GNU/Linux still were
noticeably better than those of the commercial systems).''

For details, see their paper: Fuzz Revisited: A Re-examination of the
Reliability of Unix Utilities and Services (postscript 146k) by Barton P.
Miller <bart@cs.wisc.edu>, David Koski, Cjin Pheow Lee, Vivekananda
Maganty, Ravi Murthy, Ajitkumar Natarajan, and Jeff Steidl.

Why Free Software is More Reliable

It is no fluke that the GNU utilities are so reliable. There are good
reasons why free software tends to be of high quality.

One reason is that free software gets the whole community involved in
working together to fix problems. Users not only report bugs, they even fix
bugs and send in fixes. Users work together, conversing by email, to get to
the bottom of a problem and make the software work trouble-free.

Another is that developers really care about reliability. Free software
packages do not always compete commercially, but they still compete for a
good reputation, and a program which is unsatisfactory will not achieve the
popularity that developers hope for. What's more, an author who makes the
source code available for all to see puts his reputation on the line, and
had better make the software clean and clear, on pain of the community's
disapproval.

Cancer Clinic Relies on Free Software!

The Roger Maris Cancer Center in Fargo, North Dakota (the same Fargo which
was recently the scene of a movie and a flood) uses Linux-based GNU systems
precisely because reliability is essential. A network of GNU/Linux machines
runs the information system, coordinates drug therapies, and performs many
other functions. This network needs to be available to the Center's staff
at a moment's notice.

According to Dr. G.W. Wettstein <greg@wind.rmcc.com>:

     ``the proper care of our cancer patients would not be what it is
     today without [GNU/]Linux ... The tools that we have been able to
     deploy from free software channels have enabled us to write and
     develop innovative applications which ... do not exist through
     commercial avenues.''

Bulletproof GNU Utilities!

Scott Maxwell is leading an effort to eliminate "fuzz bugs" from GNU
software, thus making them even more reliable. You can read about the
project on http://home.pacbell.net/s-max/scott/bulletproof-penguin.html.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Return to GNU's home page.

Please send FSF & GNU inquiries & questions to gnu@gnu.org. There are also
other ways to contact the FSF.

Please send comments on these web pages to webmasters@www.gnu.org, send
other questions to gnu@gnu.org.

Copyright (C) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2001 Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59
Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111, USA

Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted in
any medium, provided this notice is preserved.

Updated: $Date: 2002/07/03 02:54:48 $ $Author: chstoneliu $
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
