Waiting for the Knock

by Richard Stallman.

Imagine that you are afraid of a knock on the door.

Imagine that the knock could be the police, coming in secret to interrogate
you. Imagine that they can demand you decrypt files for them, and demand
you tell them your code keys, even to get evidence to use against you. In
effect, they can force you to testify against yourself, and it is a crime
to refuse.

Imagine that for these offenses you are effectively considered guilty
unless you can prove your innocence: mere failure to comply is the crime.
If you do not have the key they demand, you will be imprisoned unless you
can prove it.

Imagine that they can behave arbitrarily, because their actions are secret.
They do not need to get a court's authorization to demand your testimony.
And if you tell anyone--your friends and associates, a news reporter, even
in most circumstances an open courtroom--that you have been forced to
testify, they will imprison you just for telling.

Imagine that the only judicial control over these actions is a special
secret court, with no jury, where decisions are made by judges chosen for
their sympathy to the prosecution. Imagine that they can hear evidence from
the prosecutors in secret, so you do not even have a chance to deny it.

Unfortunately, there is no need for imagination. This is a real
proposal--not in China or Iraq, as you might expect, but in Britain. It was
proposed as part of the draft Electronic Communications bill, but has been
withdrawn from there, probably to be reintroduced shortly in a separate
"Regulation of Investigatory Powers" bill. (Proposals to extend government
power are often secreted in bills with opposite-sounding names.) The
country that gave the world the concept of the rights of citizens, of
protection from abuse of government power, of the right to remain silent
and not be compelled to testify against yourself, is tearing up the concept
and throwing it away.

The rot in the British legal system began under the previous Conservative
government, which passed an "anti-terrorist" law saying that--for certain
crimes--if you refuse to answer questions, that can be held against you.
Thus the first stone was thrown at the right to remain silent.

As a supposed protection against abuse, this law said that courts must not
convict based on silence alone; they must have some other basis as well.
But the same law established that an official accusation of membership in a
prohibited organization can also be held against you. This, too, is not
sufficient by itself--which only means that the two together are needed for
a conviction. If you are accused of belonging to a prohibited organization,
and you refuse to answer police questions, you go to prison.

Of course, every law that undermines the rights of citizens has an "urgent"
justification. For this law, the justification was IRA terrorism; but the
cure is far worse than the disease. A century from now, IRA bombing will be
just a chapter of history, but the painful effects of the "cure" will still
be felt.

The "New Labor" government of Prime Minister Blair which replaced the
Conservative government is eager to extend this policy to other areas. I
was not greatly surprised to learn that the same government also plans to
eliminate the right to a jury in criminal trials (see The Guardian,
November 20 1999, page 1). These policies would gladden the heart of an
Argentine general.

When you speak with British officials about the issue, they insist that you
can trust them to use their power wisely for the good of all. Of course,
that is absurd. Britain must hold to the tradition of British law, and
respect the rights of citizens to a fair trial and non-self-incrimination.

When you try to discuss the details, they respond with pettifoggery; for
example, they pretend that the plan would not really consider you guilty
until proven innocent, because the official forms that demand your code
keys and your silence are officially considered the proof of guilt. That in
practice this is indistinguishable from requiring proof of innocence
requires more perspicuity than they will admit to.

If you live in Britain, what can you do?

  1. Take political action now. Tell all the political parties that this
     issue is of great concern to you, and invite each to be the one you
     will vote for to prevent such laws. Look at www.stand.org.uk for
     further advice.
  2. Write to your MP, the e-Minister Patricia Hewitt
     (e.minister@dti.gov.uk), the Home Secretary, and the newspapers,
     stating your firm opposition to these measures.
  3. Talk with your Internet Service Provider's management about the
     importance of this issue.
  4. Start using encrypted mail, using the GNU Privacy Guard or another
     suitable encryption program, and use it as widely as possible and with
     as many people as possible. The more people are using encryption, the
     harder it will be for governments to stamp it out. The GNU Privacy
     Guard is Free Software (you are free to redistribute and change it),
     and is available on www.gnupg.org.
  5. Once you have read an encrypted message, if you don't need to save it,
     get rid of it. Don't just delete the file; copy several other files of
     junk into the file, one by one, so that the old bits cannot be
     recovered. (The GNU Privacy Guard will soon provide a convenient
     command for doing this.)
  6. If you need to save an encrypted message, use steganography (hiding
     information by embedding messages within other harmless messages) so
     that it is impossible for anyone to be sure that encrypted data is
     present. You can use steganography for transmitting messages as well.
  7. Anyone, even you, could be a target of this law. Don't assume that you
     are safe just because you are "not a criminal"; almost everyone breaks
     some laws, but even if you do not, you could still be suspected. Your
     friends and correspondents are likely to be next after you.

     So arrange innocent-sounding "code phrases" with them now, things like
     "Agnes has a bad cold" (but don't use this one!), as a way you can
     inform them that you were interrogated by the secret police, without
     giving the police a way to detect that you did so.

You never know what might lead the secret police to your door. Take the
necessary precautions now, because the only thing worse than fearing the
knock on the door is being oblivious to the danger.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
A version of this article was published in the Guardian, a London
newspaper, on 25 November 1999.

As of March 2000, the R.I.P. was under active consideration in Parliament.
One minor protection has been added: to imprison you for failing to produce
a key, the government must prove you once had it. This provision seems
designed to protect the Home Secretary, who is championing the bill, from a
campaign of sending him encrypted email which he had no way to read. The
change is a slight improvement, but the bill remains unworthy of a
democratic country.

For more information, consult the Foundation for Information Policy
Research, or FIPR.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
Return to Richard Stallman's home page.

Please send comments on these web pages to rms@www.stallman.org.

Copyright (C) 1999 Richard Stallman

Verbatim copying and distribution of this entire article is permitted in
any medium, provided this notice is preserved.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
