Translations & Such: An Inner Landscape [Kajii Motojiro]Notify Blogger about 
objectionable content.
What does this mean? Send As SMS
BlogThis!Translations & Such 
Creative Commons licensed translations of Japanese fictionSunday, May 07, 2006
An Inner Landscape [Kajii Motojiro] 
one


Takashi gazes from his window at the sleeping street. No windows are lit, and 
the silence of late night forms a halo about the street lights. The occasional 
harsh sound could be beetles colliding.

It is a maze-like town, and even during the day few people pass by. Fish 
entrails and the corpses of rats lie for days without moving. The houses on 
either side have a dilapidated air, and show the scars of weathering. The 
colorings are faded, the rough plaster walls crumbling, and one feels that the 
people within must live spiritless lives like old rags. The window in Takashi's 
room opens out to that street, positioning him as if sitting at the head of a 
table.

At times the sound of a clock's pendulum can be heard seeping in through gaps in 
the door. A wind blows blackly through a faraway tree, and then a nearby 
oleander tree begins to shudder in the deep night. Takashi just gazes. The dimly 
white peaks of houses fade away and then reappear in his field of vision, and he 
feels unfocused thoughts passing through his mind again. Crickets are chirping. 
From where he thinks he can hear them wafts a faint odor of moldering 
vegetation.

"Your room always smells like French escargot," a friend once said while 
visiting. "No matter where you live you immediately give the place an aura of 
gloom".

A spread out futon pushes through the room's clutter: A water heater meant for 
use on picnics, always choked with spent tea leaves. Here and there various 
books, separated from their cases. Scraps of paper. During the day Takashi 
sleeps in the midst of all this like some nocturnal bird. He awakes to the 
faraway sound of a school bell. At night, when people are settling down to 
sleep, he comes to the window to gaze outside.

His thoughts gradually become clearer, like a silhouette emerging from a thick 
fog. The scenery that disperses and condenses before his eyes begins to seem at 
times completely familiar, and then at other times completely unknown. Then a 
certain point is reached, and Takashi can no longer distinguish between his 
thoughts and the late-night town. His melancholy and the oleander in the 
darkness are one. An unseen electric lamp traces out an earthen wall, merging 
its shadow with the darkness, and there his resignation too takes solid form.

Takashi thinks that his inner landscape lies just there.


two


Takashi stays awake at his window all night because he can't sleep, even at such 
an hour. Thoughts too dark to allow sleep torment him. He has caught a terrible 
illness from a woman.

Long ago, he had a dream something like this--

His leg is swelling. Not only that, but it bears two rows of something like bite 
marks. As the swelling gradually becomes worse the marks grow deeper and their 
edges expand.

Some of the marks look like the navel on a navel orange, with mounds of 
foul-looking meat peeking out from within. Some are long, deep slits, like the 
path of a bookworm through an old book. Strangely, his leg turns green as it 
swells before his eyes, yet there is no pain. The sores are scarlet, like 
flowers on a cactus. His mother is there.

"Well, now look what's happened to me," he says in an accusing tone.
"It's not my fault!"
"Well you're the one who made these marks with your fingernails!"

He believes that his mother has dug her nails into him. But as he says so, a 
thought comes to him. Could it be...? But there is no way she could know about 
that, he reassures himself, and in his dream he implores her, "Mother! Help me!"

His mother's resolve softens, and after a time she at last says, "All right, 
I'll fix you up."

At some point the two rows of sores have moved, and now stretch from his chest 
to his stomach. As he watches, wondering what she will do, his mother pulls at 
the skin of his chest (which at some point has started sagging like a shriveled 
teat) and begins stuffing one sore into its opposite, just as if sliding a 
button into a buttonhole. In the dream Takashi looks on silently with a 
dissatisfied expression. One pair at a time, a sore is tucked into the one 
opposing it.

"This is Dr. ___'s method," his mother says.

He looks as if he is wearing a frock coat with many buttons, though the smallest 
movement seems likely to make them come loose. Takashi is careful to keep his 
secret concealed from his mother while he continues to stab out at her. This had 
an effect on him, even though it was all within a dream.


* * *


Takashi was surprised that consorting with prostitutes could so darkly encroach 
upon his life, to the point of appearing in his dreams. In the course of his 
normal life he would have relations with girls, and sometimes a girl would do 
some unkind thing. At such times Takashi would imagine that girl a cruel whore, 
and then be taken by an unbearable self-loathing. Each time that happened 
Takashi realized how filthy he had become inside, and knew the extent of the 
deformation caused by this wedge driven into his life.

And then another wedge was driven into him-the suspicion of disease. Part of his 
old nightmare had come true.

He found himself noticing doctors' signboards on the street, or unintentionally 
reading advertisements in newspapers, though he had never before paid attention 
to such things. He would see some beautiful thing, and feel happy because of it. 
But then he would feel a sudden discontent, and following that emotion to its 
source would invariably lead to the sickness. At those times Takashi could not 
help but feel as if some dark thing lay in wait for him everywhere he went.

Sometimes he would take out that diseased part of him and examine it. It 
beseeched him with an expression like some sorrowful animal.



three


Takashi often remembers that unfortunate night.

He sat alone in a room facing the traffic, where he could hear drunken johns and 
the voices of the women who called to them. The sounds of lively shamisen 
guitars and taiko drums from the neighborhood beat against his solitary heart.

Oh, this place! Takashi thought, straining to hear the sounds of shuffling 
sandals and, weaving among that, the clacking of wooden clogs. It seemed as if 
all the sounds, the call of the ice cream seller, the singing voices, all of 
them, were being made for some purpose.

The sound of the serving girl's clogs, too, hadn't affected him so when they 
were just out front on Shijo Avenue.

Takashi felt a self like the one that had walked down Shijo Avenue a few minutes 
ago&#8211;a self that could freely think upon things&#8211;there in the room with him.

Finally, I'm here, he thought.

The serving girl entered, and the room filled with the smell of wax from the 
charcoal sticks in the brazier she brought. Takashi found his tongue tied, and 
when she left he told himself that no one could be expected to change moods so 
abruptly.

The woman was a long time in coming. Takashi grew anxious, and on a whim decided 
to climb up to the fire lookout of this house that he had come to know so well.

Climbing up a rotting ladder, he passed a room with its paper window screen 
open. Inside, a futon was laid out and someone glared out at him. Takashi 
pretended not to notice and continued up, thinking about how this place lent 
self-assurance.

Climbing up to the lookout, he saw that this part of town was covered in dark 
roof tiles. Here and there amid the tiles electrically lit parlors were visible 
through bamboo screens. A tall building containing a restaurant stuck out from a 
surprising location. That must be Shijo Avenue, Takashi thought. Beyond the 
rooftops he could see the red gate of Yasaka Shrine and the forest, dimly 
revealed by reflected light from electric lamps. The evening haze blurred the 
far-away details of the Maruyama and Higashiyama districts. The Milky Way flowed 
from somewhere in that direction.

Takashi felt himself being set free. From now on I'll always come up here, he 
thought. A night heron flew by, calling. A soot-black cat walked along the roof. 
Takashi saw a pot of spent autumn flowers at his feet.

The woman said that she was from Hakata, and her Kyoto dialect had a strange 
accent. She had a neat appearance, and Takashi told her so. This loosened the 
woman's mouth, and she told him that even though she had just come to town she 
had sold some thousands of flowers the previous month, putting her fourth from 
the top in this brothel district. Starting with whoever topped the list, the 
girlsÅf names would be posted in the coordinating office, and some number of top 
girls would receive prize money. She said that she looked so neat and tidy 
because her mistress, who she called Mother, took good care of so valuable a 
girl.

"So I'm working as hard as I can," she said. "Just recently I caught a cold, and 
so I'm quite tired, and so Mother told me I should rest, but I keep working."
"Are you taking any medicine?"
"They gave me some, but each dose costs five sen , and it never helps, no matter 
how much I take."

While listening to the girl, Takashi recalled a woman that a man named S___ had 
spoken of.
She was an ugly woman, S___ said, and you would be embarrassed to ask for her by 
name no matter how drunk you were. And the filth of the nightwear she wore, you 
wouldn't believe it, he said.

The first time S___ was paired with her it was by mere chance. He ended up 
having quite the bizarre experience, however, and after that whenever he got 
raging drunk he would give in to his baser self and call for that woman. He said 
that when he drank something happened to stir him up, and then no other woman 
could satisfy him.

When Takashi heard the story he thought that it was one thing if the woman had 
perversions of her own, but the fact that the battle for survival in the red 
light district forced that ugly woman to do such peculiar things was depressing.

S___ told him that the woman was as silent as a mute. Not that you would want to 
talk to her, he added. At the time Takashi had wondered how many customers, 
likely mute themselves, the woman had.

In his mind, Takashi compared the ugly woman with this one as he listened to her 
prattle.
"You sure are a quiet one," she said.

Her skin was hot. Each time his touch reached some new place he found her heat 
increased.

"I have another to go to," the woman said, beginning her preparations to leave. 
"You're leaving too, right?"
"Yeah."

Lying down, Takashi saw the woman facing him, putting on her kimono. Watching 
her, he thought, Here it comesÅc There! That's itÅc, ÅethatÅf being a feeling 
something like this: He's always thinking about women, and he comes to a place 
like this to buy one. She comes into the room. Up to this point she's fine. The 
woman takes off her kimono, and still she's fine. But then as things progress he 
becomes unsure of what it is that he is always imagining as being a woman. So, 
these are the arms of a woman, he tells himself. But they are just a woman's 
arms, and nothing more. But then, as she prepares to leave, she once again takes 
the form of a woman.

"I wonder if the trains are still running?"
"I have no idea."

Actually, Takashi hoped that the trains had stopped. Then the mistress 
downstairs might say something like "If you don't want to leave, I don't mind if 
you sleep here until morning." Takashi thought it more likely that she would 
say, "If you aren't going to call someone up, you need to leave."

"You aren't leaving with me?" The woman had finished dressing, but was still 
hanging back. Well..., he thought, starting to take off his sweaty robe.

The woman left, and he immediately told the serving girl to bring him a beer.

The cry of a sparrow sounded in the gutter. In his half-awake mind, Takashi 
pictured the fresh exterior being lit up in the morning fog. Lifting his head, 
he could see the sleeping face of a woman, lit by the dim light of electric 
lamps in the morning air.

He awoke again to the sound of a flower seller's voice at the front door. What a 
fresh voice, he thought. He could almost see the color of the morning sun 
spilling over the flowers and the sakaki leaves that she carried.

After a time the doors of homes flew open, and the voices of children heading 
for school came from the street. The woman was still deep asleep.

"Go home. Take a bath," the woman said through a yawn, holding on her palm the 
woven hairpiece she wore on top of her bun. "I'm going now," she said, leaving. 
Takashi just went back to sleep.



four


Takashi goes from the foot of the Marutacho Bridge down to the dry riverbed. The 
houses facing the riverbed create afternoon shadows.

There is a pile of the stones used to fortify the riverbank, and they have a 
strong, peculiar odor under the autumn sun. Over towards the Aragami Bridge 
centrifugal drying machines are strewn about the fields. Somewhere in that 
direction a metal measuring tape flashes in the sun. Below the Aragami Bridge 
the river flows in fine ripples like a reed screen. Shallow water glitters as it 
burbles by a sandbar choked with summer grasses. A wagtail flies off.

The sun stabs down onto his back, but in the shade the cold of autumn curls 
about him. Takashi sits there. People go by, cars go by, he thinks. And then, 
I'm in pain in the city.

Foot and vehicle traffic passes by on the road running along the opposite bank. 
Along it is the public market, a shed filled with barrels of tar, and people 
working in an empty lot, perhaps building a house.

Occasionally a wind blows from upriver. With a rustling it pushes a crumpled 
page of a newspaper past where he sits. Stopped by a small stone, for a time it 
holds out against the wind. But then with a sudden flip it is carried off again.

Two children and a dog walk upriver. The dog comes back, gives the newspaper a 
sniff, and returns to following the children.

A zelkova tree thick with leaves stands on his side of the river. Takashi is 
taken by the tips of its branches, waving high in the wind. After gazing at it 
for a time some part of his soul moves into the treetop, and he feels himself 
swaying with the small leaves and bending with the green branches among the high 
air currents.

Ah, this feeling... Takashi thinks. To just look, that's something, too. I can 
move part, perhaps all of my soul into a thing.

Takashi thinks on such things. The lure of the window he sits at every night, 
how it quells his depression and troubles. The marvel of becoming some thing 
that he gazes at from a distance. He feels that in the high branches of the 
zelkova tree as well.

I'm in pain in the city.

To the north, red torii dot the Kamo Forest. Above that the faraway mountains 
blend together. Hieizan Mountain forms a backdrop for columns of smoke from the 
chimneys of spinning mills. Red brick buildings, a post office. Bicycles pass 
over the Aragami Bridge, among parasols and horse-drawn carriages. The shade 
reaches the riverbed, and a peddler sounds his trumpet.



five


Takashi sometimes aimlessly walks the streets of the city until late at night.
There are no people on Shijo Avenue, except for the rare passing drunk. The 
night fog has settled down onto the asphalt. Stores on both sides of the street 
have trash bins pushed out to the pavement, and their doors are locked tight. 
Here and there are puddles of vomit and overturned bins. Takashi recalls times 
when he would get so drunk, but now he walks on in silence.

He turns and enters the Shinkyogoku mall, where it is oddly busy for the time. 
The sound of a woman's clogs comes from between shuttered doors as she carries a 
metal basin to the bath. A shop clerk brings out a pair of roller skates. A man 
carries a delivery order of udon noodles. Youths play tug-of-war with a pole in 
the middle of traffic. It is almost as if the existence of these people is 
buried in the bustle of daytime, but is able to express itself at this hour.

Leaving the mall, the town returns to a true late night. The sound of his clogs, 
which he never notices during the daytime, is sharp in his ears. The silence of 
the area makes him feel as if he is walking through it with some strange intent.

Takashi hangs a small Korean bell at his waist as he walks through these late 
nights. It is a gift from a friend, purchased for him at the Korea Pavilion in 
the Okazaki Park exhibition grounds. It has blue and red cloisonn&eacute; work over a 
silver base, and a beautiful mellow sound. When among other people it can't be 
heard, but it begins to ring on late night roads as if an embodiment of his 
heart.

The town he walks through opens up to him, as does the view from his window. 
These are roads that he has never walked down before, but at the same time they 
produce a feeling of familiarity in him. These are no longer just the same roads 
that he has walked down some few times before. Takashi would lose track of how 
long he had been walking, and would feel that he has become an eternal 
passer-by.

At such times, the ring of the Korean bell causes Takashi's heart to tremble. At 
times, Takashi feels as if his shell of a body is left behind on the street and 
only the sound of the bell passes through the town. At other times it feels as 
if a clear mountain stream flows out from near his waist and into his body. It 
flows about within him, and cleanses his sickness-fouled blood.
I'm gradually getting better.

The ringing of his small hope purely vibrates the late-night air.



six


The view from his window is the same every night. To Takashi all nights are the 
same. But one night Takashi sees a point of blue-white light in a tree in the 
darkness. It must be some kind of insect, he thinks. Takashi sees the light 
again the following night, and the night after that.

When he leaves the window and lays down on his bed, he feels a dim point of 
light glowing in the darkness of his room as well.

"You creature that is ailing me! In due course I will disappear into the 
darkness, but I think that you are able to stay awake without sleeping. Like 
that insect outside, burning its blue light."
posted by Tony at 10:02 AM    
2 Comments:
  Tony said... 
  The Japanese title for this story is "Aru kokoro no fuukei" (Ç†ÇÈêSÇÃïóåi). This is 
  a translation I did for the 5th Shizuoka International Translation 
  Competition. I chose this story because it was the most difficult of the three 
  fiction pieces, under the false assumption that only a good translation of the 
  most difficult story could win. Of course, the judges were more enlightened 
  than that (the top two translations were good translations of the "easier" 
  pieces), and since this story is a bit beyond my skill level I turned out a 
  mediocre submission, at best.

  Kajii Motojiro was born in 1901 and died of tuberclosis in 1932. This story 
  was written in (I think it was) the late 1920's, when Kajii was bedridden with 
  the disease. As in this story, much of his work had themes related to 
  participation in vs. observation of life ("Ah, this feeling... To just look, 
  that's something, too. I can move part, perhaps all of my soul into a 
  thing."), as his illness forced him into a life of watching the world pass by 
  him as he lay sick in bed. Kajii's most famous story is probably "Lemon".

  Links:
  The original Japanese story in XHTML, courtesy of Aozora Bunko

  (Japanese) Wikipedia article for Kajii Motojiro
  May 07, 2006 6:29 PM   
  Tony said... 
  Photo courtesy of skyseeker on Flickr. Thank you for releasing this photo 
  under a Creative Commons license!
  May 11, 2006 8:28 PM   
Post a Comment 
Links to this post:
  See links to this post 
    <$BlogBacklinkTitle$>   
  <$BlogBacklinkSnippet$> 
  posted by <$BlogBacklinkAuthor$> @ <$BlogBacklinkDateTime$> 
Create a Link
<< Home Other recent stories
  The Acorns and the Wildcat [Miyazawa Kenji] 
  The Restaurant of Many Orders [Miyazawa Kenji] 
About Me
   
  Name:Tony Gonzalez 
  Location:Atlanta, Georgia, United States 
View my complete profile 

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.5 License. 




   