                 INTERVIEW WITH KARL MARX,
                  HEAD OF L'INTERNATIONALE

    REVOLT OF LABOR AGAINST CAPITAL -- THE TWO FACES OF
L'INTERNATIONALE -- TRANSFORMATION OF SOCIETY -- ITS PROGRESS IN THE UNITED
                                   STATES

                                by R. Landor

                       New York World, July 18, 1871
                                 reprinted
                Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly, August 12, 1871

London, July 3 -- You have asked me to find out something about the
International Association, and I have tried to do so. The enterprise is a
difficult one just now. London is indisputably the headquarters of the
Association, but the English people have got a scare, and smell
International in everything as King James smelled gunpowder after the
famous plot. The consciousness of the Society has naturally increased with
the suspiciousness of the public; and if those who guide it have a secret
to keep, they are of the stamp of men who keep a secret well. I have called
on two of their leading members, have talked with one freely, and I here
give you the substance of my conversation. I have satisfied myself of one
thing, that it is a society of genuine workingmen, but that these workmen
are directed by social and political theories of another class. One man
whom I saw, a leading member of the Council, was sitting at his workman's
bench during our interview, and left off talking to me from time to time to
receive a complaint, delivered in no courteous tone, from one of the many
little masters in the neighborhood who employed him. I have heard this same
man make eloquent speeches in public inspired in every passage with the
energy of hate toward the classes that call themselves his rulers. I
understood the speeches after this glimpse at the domestic life of the
orator. He must have felt that he had brains enough to have organized a
working government, and yet here he was obliged to devote his life to the
most revolting taskwork of a mechanical profession. He was proud and
sensitive, and yet at every turn he had to return a bow for a grunt and a
smile for a command that stood on about the same level in the scale of
civility with a huntsman's call to his dog. This man helped me to a glimpse
of one side of the nature of the International, the result of

                           Labor Against Capital

of the workman who produces against the middleman who enjoys. Here was the
hand that would smite hard when the time came, and as to the head that
plans, I think I saw that too, in my interview with Dr. Karl Marx.

Dr. Karl Marx is a German doctor of philosophy, with a German breadth of
knowledge derived both from observation of the living world and from books.
I should conclude that he has never been a worker in the ordinary sense of
the term. His surroundings and appearance are those of a well-to-do man of
the middle class. The drawing room into which I was ushered on the night of
the interview would have formed very comfortable quarters for a thriving
stockbroker who had made his competence and was now beginning to make his
fortune. It was comfort personified, the apartment of a man of taste of
easy means, but with nothing in it peculiarly characteristic of its owner.
A fine album of Rhine views on the table, however, gave a clue to his
nationality. I peered cautiously into the vase on the sidetable for a bomb.
I sniffed for petroleum, but the smell was the smell of roses. I crept back
stealthily to my seat, and moodily awaited the worst.

He has entered and greeted me cordially, and we are sitting face to face.
Yes, I am tete-a-tete with the revolution incarnate, with the real founder
and guiding spirit of the International Society, with the author of the
address in which capital was told that is it warred on labor, it must
expect to have its house burned down about its ears -- in a word, with the

                         Apologist for the Commune

of Paris. Do you remember the bust of Socrates? The man who died rather
than profess his belief in the Gods of the time -- the man with the fine
sweep of profile for the forehead running meanly at the end into a little
snub, curled-up feature, like a bisected pothook, that formed the nose.
Take this bust in your mind's eye, color the beard black, dashing it here
and there with puffs of gray; clap the head thus made on a portly body of
the middle height, and the Doctor is before you. Throw a veil over the
upper part of the face, and you might be in the company of a born
vestryman. Reveal the essential feature, the immense brown, and you know at
once that you have to deal with that most formidable of all composite
individual forces -- a dreamer who thinks, a thinker who dreams.

I went straight to my business. The world, I said, seemed to be in the dark
about the International, hating it very much, but not able to say clearly
what thing it hated. Some, who professed to have peered further into the
gloom than their neighbors, declared that they had made out a sort of Janus
figure with a fair, honest workman's smile on one of its faces, and on the
other, a murderous conspirator's scowl. Would he light up the case of
mystery in which theory dwelt?

The professor laughed, chuckled a little I fancied, at the thought that we
were so frightened of him. "There is no mystery to clear up, dear sir," he
began, in a very polished form of the Hans Breitmann dialect, "except
perhaps the mystery of human stupidity in those who perpetually ignore the
fact that out Association is a public one, and that the fullest reports of
its proceedings are published for all who care to read them. You may buy
our rules for a penny, and a shilling laid out in pamphlets will teach you
almost as much about us as we know ourselves.

R. [Landor]: Almost -- yes, perhaps so; but will not the something I shall
not know constitute the all-important reservation? To be quite frank with
you, and to put the case as it strikes an outside observer, this general
claim of depreciation of you must mean something more than the ignorant ill
will of the multitude. And it is still pertinent to ask, even after what
you have told me, what is the International Society?

Dr. M.: You have only to look at the individuals of which it is composed --
workmen.

R.: Yes, but the soldier need be no exponent of the statecraft that sets
him in motion. I know some of your members, and I can believe that they are
not of the stuff of which conspirators are made. Besides, a secret shared
by a million men would be no secret at all. But what if these were only the
instruments in the hands of a bold, and, I hope you will forgive me for
adding, not overscrupulous conclave?

Dr. M.: There is nothing to prove.

R.: The last Paris insurrection?

Dr. M.: I demand firstly the proof that there was any plot at all -- that
anything happened that was not the legitimate effect of the circumstances
of the moment; or the plot granted, I demand the proofs of the
participation in it of the International Association.

R.: The presence of the communal body of so many members of the
Association.

Dr. M.: Then it was a plot of the Freemasons, too, for their share in the
work as individuals was by no means a slight one. I should not be
surprised, indeed, to find the Pope setting down the whole insurrection to
their account. But try another explanation. The insurrection in Paris was
made by the workmen of Paris. The ablest of the workmen must necessarily
have been its leaders and administration, but the ablest of the workmen
happen also to be members of the International Association. Yet, the
Association, as such, may be in no way responsible for their action.

R.: It will seem otherwise to the world. People talk of secret instruction
from London, and even grants of money. Can it be affirmed that the alleged
openness of the Association's proceedings precludes all secrecy of
communication?

Dr. M.: What association ever formed carried on its work without private as
well as public agencies? But to talk of secret instruction from London, as
of decrees in the matter of faith and morals from some centre of papal
domination and intrigue, is wholly to misconceive the nature of the
International. This would imply a centralized form of government for the
International, whereas the real form is designedly that which gives the
greatest play to local energy and independence. In fact, the International
is not properly a government for the working class at all. It is a bond of
union rather than a controlling force.

R.: And of union to what end?

Dr. M.: The economical emancipation of the working class by the conquest of
political power. The use of that political power to the attainment of
social ends. It is necessary that our aims should be thus comprehensive to
include every form of working-class activity. To have made them of a
special character would have been to adapt them to the needs of one section
-- one nation of workmen alone. But how could all men be asked to unite to
further the objects of a few? To have done that, the Association must have
forfeited its title to International. The Association does not dictate the
form of political movements; it only requires a pledge as to their end. It
is a network of affiliated societies spreading all over the world of labor.
In each part of the world, some special aspect of the problem presents
itself, and the workmen there address themselves to its consideration in
their own way. Combinations among workmen cannot be absolutely identical in
detail in Newcastle and in Barcelona, in London and in Berlin. In England,
for instance, the way to show political power lies open to the working
class. Insurrection would be madness where peaceful agitation would more
swiftly and surely do the work. In France, a hundred laws of repression and
a mortal antagonism between classes seem to necessitate the violent
solution of social war. The choices of that solution is the affair of the
working classes of that country. The International does not presume to
dictate in the matter and hardly to advise. But to every movement it
accords its sympathy and its aid within the limits assigned by its own
laws.

R.: And what is the nature of that aid?

Dr. M.: To give an example, one of the commonest forms of the movement for
emancipation is that of strikes. Formerly, when a strike took place in one
country, it was defeated by the importation of workmen from another. The
International has nearly stopped all that. It receives information of the
intended strike, it spreads that information among its members, who at once
see that for them the seat of the struggle must be forbidden ground. The
masters are thus left alone to reckon with their men. In most cases, the
men require no other aid than that. Their own subscriptions, or those of
the societies to which they are more immediately affiliated, supply them
with funds, but should the pressure upon them become too heavy, and the
strike be one of which the Association approves, their necessities are
supplied out of the common purse. By these means, a strike of the cigar
makers of Barcelona was brought to a victorious issue the other day. But
the Society has not interest in strikes, though it supports them under
certain conditions. It cannot possibly gain by them in a pecuniary point of
view, but it may easily lose. Let us sum it all up in a word. The working
classes remain poor amid the increase of wealth, wretched amid the increase
of luxury. Their material privation dwarfs their moral as well as their
physical stature. They cannot rely on others for a remedy. It has become
then with them an imperative necessity to take their own case in hand. They
must revive the relations between themselves and the capitalists and
landlords, and that means they must transform society. This is the general
end of every known workmen's organization; land and labor leagues, trade
and friendly societies, co-operative production are but means toward it. To
establish a perfect solidarity between these organizations is the business
of the International Association. Its influence is beginning to be felt
everywhere. Two papers spread its views in Spain, three in Germany, the
same number in Austria and in Holland, six in Belgium, and six in
Switzerland. And now that I have told you what the International is, you
may, perhaps, be in a position to form your own opinion as to its pretended
plots.

R.: And Mazzini, is he a member of your body?

Dr. M.: (laughing) Ah, no. We should have made but little progress if we
had not got beyond the range of his ideas.

R.: You surprise me. I should certainly have thought that he represented
most advanced views.

Dr. M.: He represents nothing better than the old idea of a middle-class
republic. We want no part of the middle class. He has fallen as far to the
rear of the modern movement as the German professors, who, nevertheless,
are still considered in Europe as the apostles of the cultured democratism
of the future. They were so, at one time -- before '48, perhaps, when the
German middle class, in the English sense, had scarcely attained its proper
development. But now they have gone over bodily to the reaction, and the
proletariat knows them no more.

R.: Some people have thought they saw signs of a positivist element in your
organization.

Dr. M.: No such thing. We have positivists among us, and others not of our
body who work as well. But this is not by virtue of their philosophy, which
will have nothing to do with popular government, as we understand it, and
which seeks only to put a new hierarchy in place of the old one.

R.: It seems to me, then, that the leaders of the new international
movement have had to form a philosophy as well as an association
themselves.

Dr. M.: Precisely. It is hardly likely, for instance, that we could hope to
prosper in our war against capital if we derive our tactics, say, from the
political economy of Mill. He has traced one kind of relationship between
labor and capital. We hope to show that it is possible to establish
another.

R.: And the United States?

Dr. M.: The chief concerns of our activity are for the present among the
old societies of Europe. Many circumstances have hitherto tended to prevent
the labor problem from assuming an all-absorbing importance in the United
States. But they are rapidly disappearing, and it is rapidly coming to the
front there with the growth, as in Europe, of a laboring class distinct
from the rest of the community and divorced from capital.

R.: It would seem that in this country the hoped-for solution, whatever it
may be, will be attained without the violent means of revolution. The
English system of agitating by platform and press, until minorities become
converted into majorities, is a hopeful sign.

Dr. M.: I am not so sanguine on that point as you. The English middle class
has always shown itself willing enough to accept the verdict of the
majority, so long as it enjoyed the monopoly of the voting power. But, mark
me, as soon as it finds itself outvoted on what it considers vital
questions, we shall see here a new slaveowners's war.

I have given you, as well as I can remember them, the heads of my
conversation with this remarkable man. I shall leave you to form your own
conclusions. Whatever may be said for or against the probability of its
complicity with the movement of the Commune, we may be assured that in the
International Association, the civilized world has a new power in
its midst, with which it must soon come to a reckoning for good or ill.

                                  - 30 -
         ---------------------------------------------------------

[Image] Media Interviews
[Image] Biographical Archive
[Image] The Main Library
[Image] Back to M/E homepage
