Translations & Such: The Truck [Akutagawa Ryunosuke]Notify Blogger about 
objectionable content.
What does this mean? Send As SMS
BlogThis!Translations & Such 
Creative Commons licensed translations of Japanese fictionMonday, June 12, 2006
The Truck [Akutagawa Ryunosuke] 

Ryohei was eight years old when construction of the light railway between 
Odawara and Atami began. He would go to the outskirts of his village every day 
to watch the construction. Not that he could see much of the actual 
construction&#8211;just a rail truck hauling dirt&#8211;but it was interesting enough to 
keep him coming.

Two workmen would ride in on the truck, standing behind the pile of dirt. The 
truck came rolling down the mountain, so it didnÅft need help to keep moving. It 
would come as if forced down, with the hems of the workmenÅfs overcoats flapping 
in the breeze and the narrow-gauge rails shuddering, and Ryohei would imagine 
that he would like to be a construction worker. At the very least, he wanted a 
chance to ride that truck with them. The truck would coast to a stop when it 
reached the level ground outside the village. As soon as it did, the workmen 
would leap down from the truck and immediately spread the dirt they were hauling 
at the end of the track. After that they would start pushing, pushing, back 
towards the mountain they had just come down. Seeing this, Ryohei would think 
that even if he couldnÅft ride on the truck, he would like to at least help push 
it.

One evening in early February, Ryohei, his six year-old brother, and a neighbor 
the same age went to where the trucks were stopped outside the village. They sat 
there in the gloom, still coated in mud. Not only that, but the construction 
workers were nowhere in sight. Nervously, the three children tried pushing the 
cart on the end of the line. Under their combined effort, the truckÅfs wheels 
suddenly turned. The sound frightened Ryohei at first, but he was not startled 
when the wheels squealed a second time. The truck slowly moved along the rail 
with its wheels spinning out a rhythm under their combined effort.

After moving fifty feet or so the grade suddenly steepened, and the truck would 
move no further no matter how hard they pushed it. It almost pulled them back 
down with it. Ryohei decided that they were ready, and gave a signal to the 
other two boys: ÅgOK! LetÅfs go!Åh

They let go of the truck simultaneously, and jumped up onto it together. The 
truck at once began moving along the rail, slowly at first but rapidly picking 
up speed as it rolled down the hill. The scenery immediately in front of them 
seemed to emerge and split in two to either side as they sped through it. The 
twilight wind on his face and the shuddering of the truck beneath his feet 
brought him to a kind of rapture.

But in just a couple of minutes the truck was back where it had started. ÅgLetÅfs 
do it again!Åh Ryohei and the two younger boys started to push the truck again, 
but before they even got the wheels moving they heard someoneÅfs footsteps behind 
them. As soon as they recognized the sound it became a booming voice, shouting, 
ÅgHey, you! Who said you could touch that?Åh

A tall construction worker stood there, wearing an old work coat bearing the 
company mark and a straw hat inappropriate to the season. (Ryohei and the two 
younger boys had already run fifty feet before they were aware of these 
details.) Ever since that episode, Ryohei never again thought about taking a 
ride on one of the trucks, even after passing by the empty construction site on 
his way home from some errand. Somewhere in his mind remained a vivid image of 
the worker standing there in the dim light, his small, yellow straw hat askew on 
his head. But even that memory would fade a little with each passing year.

Ten days or so later, Ryohei was again hanging out at the construction site 
watching the trucks arrive. In addition to the truck that hauled dirt, a truck 
loaded with cross ties came up the thick tracks that were to become the main 
line. Both of the two men pushing it were young, and from the moment he saw them 
Ryohei felt an approachability about them. Thinking that they were unlikely to 
scold him, he ran up near the truck.

ÅgCan I help you push?Åh

One of the men, this one wearing a striped shirt, gave the cheerful expression 
that Ryohei had hoped for as he pushed the cart with his face down,

ÅgSure, give it a shot.Åh

Ryohei fell in between them, and began pushing with all his might.

ÅgA strong one, ainÅfcha?Åh praised the other man, this one with a hand-rolled 
cigarette behind his ear.

Eventually the grade began to level. Ryohei was beside himself with worry that 
at any time the men would tell him they didnÅft need him to push any more. But 
the two young workers leaned into their work even more than before, continuing 
to push the truck silently on. Finally, unable to contain himself, Ryohei 
fearfully asked, ÅgCan I push as long as I like?Åh

ÅgSure you can,Åh the two answered in chorus. ÅgWhat nice people,Åh Ryohei thought.

After another five or six hundred meters the line again became a steep grade. On 
either side was a tangerine grove filled with yellow fruit taking in the 
sunshine.

ÅgI like the uphill parts, because I know that theyÅfll let me keep pushing,Åh 
thought Ryohei, throwing his entire weight into the effort.

Climbing up above the tangerine groves, the track took on a steep downhill turn. 
The man in the striped shirt called out ÅgJump on!Åh to Ryohei, who did so 
immediately. Just as the three climbed on, the truck began sliding down the 
tracks, fanning the perfume of the tangerines. The obvious thought that riding 
is a lot better than pushing crossed RyoheiÅfs mind as he filled his overcoat 
with the wind. ÅgBut the more I push on the way there, the more IÅfll get to ride 
on the way back,Åh he corrected himself.

The truck silently came to a halt in the middle of a bamboo thicket. The three 
began pushing the heavy truck as before. The thicket slowly became a forest, and 
in some places where the path sloped up the fallen leaves piled high enough to 
hide the red-rusted tracks. Coming up over the hill revealed a high cliff, 
giving a view of the chilly sea beyond. This caused Ryohei to suddenly realize 
that he had come too far.

The three of them got on the truck again. It ran under the branches of the 
forest with the ocean on their right. Ryohei was unable to enjoy the ride as he 
had before. He watched, wishing that the men would soon return home, yet of 
course understanding that they couldnÅft until they reached their destination.

The truck next stopped in front of a teahouse backed into the rough-hewn 
mountainside. The two workers went inside, and drank tea while chatting with the 
proprietress, who had an infant strapped to her back. Ryohei was annoyed, and 
wandered around the truck. Splashed mud was dried on the sturdy planks that made 
up its chassis.

After a while the man with the cigarette behind his ear (though it was no longer 
there) came out, and gave some sweets wrapped in newspaper to Ryohei, who was 
still standing near the truck. Ryohei unfeelingly said ÅgThank you,Åh but soon 
regretted his callousness, thinking it rude towards the man. As if to make up 
for that he took one of the sweets out of the wrapping and popped it in his 
mouth. It smelled of petroleum from the newspaper.

The three pushed the truck up a gentle slope. Ryohei kept his hands on the 
truck, but his mind was elsewhere.

Climbing up and over the hill brought them to a similar teahouse. The workmen 
went inside, and Ryohei stayed sitting on the truck, thinking of nothing but 
getting back home. Sunlight from the west was fading on the blooming plum tree 
that stood in front of the teahouse. Realizing that the sun was about to set, 
Ryohei could no longer just sit idly. He tried to occupy himself by kicking the 
wheels of the truck and forcefully pushing it, though he knew that he couldnÅft 
move it by himself.

When the workers came out of the teahouse, they put a hand on the load of 
crossties and carelessly said, ÅgTime for you to get home, now. WeÅfll be lodging 
where we drop this off.Åh

ÅgIf youÅfre out too late, your folksÅfll be worried.Åh

For a moment, Ryohei was stunned. All at once the realization hit him that it 
was about to get dark, and that the distance home was three or four times 
farther than when he had walked with his mother to Iwamura last year, and that 
he would have to walk all that way alone. Ryohei came close to tears, but knew 
that crying wouldnÅft help him, that there was no time for it. He made a 
perfunctory bow to the two young men, and dashed back along the tracks.

For a time, Ryohei ran mindlessly along the tracks. Noticing that the package of 
candies that he had stuck in his robe was getting in the way he threw it aside, 
and his wooden sandals soon followed that. Doing so caused small rocks to bite 
at his feet through his thin tabi socks, but his feet felt much lighter. He ran 
up a steep hill, feeling the ocean at his left. His faced distorted as the 
occasional tear came to his eyes, and though he was able to hold them back his 
nose constantly wheezed with the effort.

When he made it as far as the vicinity of the bamboo thicket, the glow had 
already faded from the sunset sky above Higane Mountain. Ryohei was increasingly 
panicked. It made him uncomfortable that the changing direction made the scenery 
look different from before. His kimono was soaked through with sweat, which now 
bothered him, and so he threw his overcoat along the side of the road as he 
sprinted down it.

It was even darker by the time he made it to the tangerine field. ÅgPlease just 
let me live,Åh he thought, slipping and stumbling as he ran.

When he finally saw the construction site outside of the village it was already 
twilight, and RyoheiÅfs desire to cry grew even stronger, but though his face 
twisted to hold back his tears he ran on without doing so.

Entering the village, electric light spilled from the houses on either side of 
the road. Under those lights, he clearly saw steam from his sweat rising off of 
his head. The women drawing water from the well and the men returning from the 
fields saw him panting, and called out to ask what was wrong. He ignored them, 
and ran past the bright lights from the store and the barber.

Bursting through the entrance to his home, he was no longer able to hold back a 
wail. His howling immediately brought his parents to him, and his mother 
especially held him close and said something to him. Ryohei, however, writhed 
about, continuing to cry and snort. His voice was so loud that several of the 
neighborhood women collected at the dim entrance. His parents and those who came 
repeatedly asked him what had happened, but no matter what they said all he 
could do was cry on. When he looked back at that long run and the loneliness 
that he felt during it, he felt that even in his loudest voice he would never be 
able to cry enough.

When he was 26, Ryohei moved with his wife and child to Tokyo. There he now 
works on the second floor of a magazine publisher as an editor. Sometimes, 
suddenly and with no provocation whatsoever, he recalls that day. Or perhaps 
something does provoke it? Tired as he is with the daily chores of life, even 
now just as back then, a long thin path through dark thickets and over hills 
stretches ever outward before him.
posted by Tony at 5:47 PM    
2 Comments:
  Tony said... 
  Railway photo from Rolf on Flickr.

  Thank you for releasing this photo under a Creative Commons license!
  June 12, 2006 11:16 PM   
  Tony said... 
  The text of the original Japanese story is here.
  June 17, 2006 1:10 AM   
Post a Comment 
Links to this post:
  See links to this post 
    <$BlogBacklinkTitle$>   
  <$BlogBacklinkSnippet$> 
  posted by <$BlogBacklinkAuthor$> @ <$BlogBacklinkDateTime$> 
Create a Link
<< Home Other recent stories
  The NighthawkÅfs Star [Miyazawa Kenji] 
  The SpiderÅfs Thread [Akutagawa Ryunosuke] 
  An Inner Landscape [Kajii Motojiro] 
  The Acorns and the Wildcat [Miyazawa Kenji] 
  The Restaurant of Many Orders [Miyazawa Kenji] 
About Me
   
  Name:Tony Gonzalez 
  Location:Atlanta, Georgia, United States 
View my complete profile 

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.5 License. 




   